The Project Gutenberg eBook of Fiction Writers on Fiction Writing
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Fiction Writers on Fiction Writing

Editor: Arthur Sullivant Hoffman

Release date: March 15, 2020 [eBook #61625]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Tim Lindell, Ernest Schaal, and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FICTION WRITERS ON FICTION WRITING ***

                   FICTION WRITERS ON FICTION WRITING




                            FICTION WRITERS
                           ON FICTION WRITING

               _Advice, Opinions and a Statement of Their
                    Own Working Methods by More Than
                          One Hundred Authors_


                         EDITED, WITH NOTES, BY

                        ARTHUR SULLIVANT HOFFMAN
                              _Author of_
                    FUNDAMENTALS OF FICTION WRITING


                             [Illustration]


                              INDIANAPOLIS
                       THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                            COPYRIGHT, 1923
                      BY THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY


               _Printed in the United States of America_


                                PRESS OF
                            BRAUNWORTH & CO.
                           BOOK MANUFACTURERS
                            BROOKLYN, N. Y.




This book is dedicated to the one hundred and sixteen authors who wrote
it and to every author who may profit from their writing.




Authors Whose Replies to the Questionnaire Make Up the Body of This
Book:

    Bill Adams
    Samuel Hopkins Adams
    Paul L. Anderson
    William Ashley Anderson
    H. C. Bailey
    Edwin Balmer
    Ralph Henry Barbour
    Frederick Orin Bartlett
    Nalbro Bartley
    Konrad Bercovici
    Ferdinand Berthoud
    H. H. Birney, Jr.
    Farnham Bishop
    Algernon Blackwood
    Max Bonter
    Katharine Holland Brown
    F. R. Buckley
    Prosper Buranelli
    Thompson Burtis
    George M. A. Cain
    Robert V. Carr
    George L. Catton
    Robert W. Chambers
    Roy P. Churchill
    Carl Clausen
    Courtney Ryley Cooper
    Arthur Crabb
    Mary Stewart Cutting
    Elmer Davis
    William Harper Dean
    Harris Dickson
    Captain Dingle
    Louis Dodge
    Phyllis Duganne
    J. Allan Dunn
    Walter A. Dyer
    Walter Prichard Eaton
    Charles Victor Fischer
    E. O. Foster
    Arthur O. Friel
    J. U. Giesy
    George Gilbert
    Kenneth Gilbert
    Louise Closser Hale
    Holworthy Hall
    Richard Matthews Hallet
    William H. Hamby
    A. Judson Hanna
    Joseph Mills Hanson
    E. E. Harriman
    Nevil G. Henshaw
    Joseph Hergesheimer
    Robert Hichens
    R. de S. Horn
    Clyde B. Hough
    Emerson Hough
    A. S. M. Hutchinson
    Inez Haynes Irwin
    Will Irwin
    Charles Tenney Jackson
    Frederick J. Jackson
    Mary Johnston
    John Joseph
    Lloyd Kohler
    Harold Lamb
    Sinclair Lewis
    Hapsburg Liebe
    Romaine H. Lowdermilk
    Eugene P. Lyle, Jr.
    Rose Macaulay
    Crittenden Marriott
    Homer I. McEldowney
    Ray McGillivray
    Helen Topping Miller
    Thomas Samson Miller
    Anne Shannon Monroe
    L. M. Montgomery
    Frederick Moore
    Talbot Mundy
    Kathleen Norris
    Anne O'Hagan
    Grant Overton
    Sir Gilbert Parker
    Hugh Pendexter
    Clay Perry
    Michael J. Phillips
    Walter B. Pitkin
    E. S. Pladwell
    Lucia Mead Priest
    Eugene Manlove Rhodes
    Frank C. Robertson
    Ruth Sawyer
    Chester L. Saxby
    Barry Scobee
    R. T. M. Scott
    Robert Simpson
    Arthur D. Howden Smith
    Theodore Seixas Solomons
    Raymond S. Spears
    Norman Springer
    Julian Street
    T. S. Stribling
    Booth Tarkington
    W. C. Tuttle
    Lucille Van Slyke
    Atreus von Schrader
    T. Von Ziekursch
    Henry Kitchell Webster
    G. A. Wells
    William Wells
    Ben Ames Williams
    Honore Willsie
    H. C. Witwer
    William Almon Wolff
    Edgar Young




                   FICTION WRITERS ON FICTION WRITING




                            FICTION WRITERS
                           ON FICTION WRITING

                     HOW THIS BOOK CAME INTO BEING

Since this book is not only written for the most part by others than
myself and since, for a second reason, its coming into being is the
result of an accident, not of any inspiration on my part, there is no
reason why I should not state frankly my opinion of its practical value
and exceptional interest.

The mere statement of that value is its own proof:--There have been
hosts of books, classes and correspondence courses claiming to teach the
writing of fiction, but in all but a handful of cases these teachers
have been eminently unqualified for the work. The majority have no sound
right to speak at all, lacking sufficient accomplishment or even
experience of their own and showing in their attempt the lack of ability
as critic or teacher often evidenced by those who are themselves unable
to create. Of the remainder a very few have proved any considerable
ability as creators of fiction and these, as a group, are inclined to
proceed on the dangerous principle that what is good for one case, their
own, is therefore good for all other cases. Another few, with some
editorial experience (though generally almost none) and, therefore, at
least some understanding of the general field, are mostly barren of
accomplishment as creators and so unable to enter satisfactorily into
the inner problems of those who do create. Still another few, while
versed in the academic requirements of literature are unfamiliar with
both the actual magazine and book field and the actual work of creating.
All of them are sadly handicapped in their undertaking by an obsession
for reducing the art of writing to a performance almost altogether
governed by general formulas and ironclad rules for universal
application.

But here is a book written not by an author of negligible standing, an
editor who can not create, a college professor speaking from the
outside, or any other theorist whatsoever, but _by the successful
writers themselves_, each telling in detail his own processes of
creation. No one else in the world can bring us so quickly to the real
heart of the matter or come so close to speaking the final word. While
the words of any one of them are of value, the contrasted and collective
cases of one hundred and sixteen of them are beyond estimate of value.
For either the beginner or the established writer. Even for each of
these one hundred and sixteen themselves.

As to the accident that brought the book into being, my own
justification for venturing to act as collector and summarizer, and the
reason for choice of the particular lines of investigation:

Having been a magazine editor for twenty years (_Adventure_, _Romance_,
_Delineator_, _Smart Set_, _Transatlantic Tales_, _Watson's_,
_Chautauquan_), I had become more and more rebellious against present
methods of teaching fiction writing, for year by year their fruits
poured across my desk by the thousands--stories often technically
correct but machine-like, artificial, lacking in real individuality.
American fiction as a whole is characterized by this result of the curse
of formula and, until that curse is removed, American fiction can never
attain the place to which native ability entitles it.

Many who attempt to write can never succeed. Some succeed despite all
obstacles. But in between are a great number with varying degree of
ability, many of them appearing in books or magazines, some of them
attaining a fair degree of real success, some of them failing of print,
but no one of them who could not do far better if he would shake himself
free from the influence of machine-like methods and give opportunity to
whatever of individuality may lie within him. A long procession of
possibilities unrealized, regrettable because of the loss to American
fiction, pathetic if one looks behind the manuscripts at vain struggles
and hopes unfulfilled.

The only chance for remedy seemed a direct attack upon the school of
formula and rule itself, followed by whatever could be done in a
constructive way. A lone editor could accomplish little by himself, but
he could accomplish even less than that if he didn't try. He was not the
only editor grumbling over the situation and among experienced writers
were many in agreement as to the evils of too much formula; perhaps,
once the challenge were definitely made--

As equipment, besides editorial experience, I had been "a contributor of
fiction to our leading magazines" sufficiently to appreciate creative
problems from the other side of the editorial desk, and at two
universities and elsewhere had absorbed sufficient of the academic for
foundation and background. There had been, too, sufficient rebellion
against general editorial precepts and precedents to keep me from
falling so deep into the editorial rut that I couldn't at least see over
the edges. Most of all, I was sick and tired of seeing the
formula-worshippers doing all they could to increase the flood of
fiction that, however perfect by formula and however skilfully polished,
is inevitably and forever hack.

So I wrote a book in protest and in the hope that it might to some
degree serve those who were willing to turn from formalism to individual
expression if only they could find some small guide-posts along the way.
In _Fundamentals of Fiction Writing_ I tried to give them, instead of
rules, an understanding of the facts of human nature upon which art and
its rules must be based, so that they might see their own way and walk
upon their own feet. To drive home the point it was necessary to show
them beyond chance of doubt that rules applied without understanding
were unsafe guides. The simplest and most effective way of proving this
was to show them that the writers who had actually succeeded did not
blindly follow general rules but chose among them each according to his
own needs and bent, and that what was one writer's meat was another
writer's poison.

So, to prove that rules must be subject to individuality, I sent out a
questionnaire to writers, planning to use the answers as an appendix to
_Fundamentals_. Some questions were added to gather further data on
facts of human nature, and still others were suggested by writers
(William Ashley Anderson and L. Patrick Greene) with whom I consulted,
answers to these last questions being sought as data of interest to
writers in general.

The answerers, of course, had not seen my book, though the body of it
was already in the publisher's hands, and in the questionnaire I took
pains that there should be no hint of any points I hoped to see
established. While the effort to keep the wording of the questions from
tending in any way against entirely uninfluenced answers made some of
them less definite and more banal than I should have liked, there was
more than compensation in the resulting wealth of data that had not been
even hoped for.

When the answers began coming in, it became at once apparent that here
was material far too valuable to be tucked away in the appendix of any
book. The questionnaire had gone to only those writers who had
contributed to my own magazine, _Adventure_, some of them beginners,
some of them established writers appearing in all our magazines and
between book-covers. It was then sent to a general list of authors and
their answers were added to those first received.

The result is a broadly representative list of authors almost perfect
for the purpose. It includes the tyro and the writer of life-long
experience, those little known along with our best and our most popular.
There are those who write avowedly for money returns alone; those who
make literary excellence their single goal. They come to authorship by
various roads from all walks in life, from England as well as America.
They run the whole gamut of difference in schooling, method, aim,
ability, experience and success.

The value of their symposium to the beginner is beyond easy calculation.
If there is an experienced writer who can not find profit as well as
interest in these ideas and methods of his fellow craftsmen, considered
both individually and collectively, I can not at the moment guess his
identity. If other editors can learn from it as much as I have, they
will find it difficult to name any other one thing from which they have
learned so much of value in so short a time. If literary critics will
bring to it a consideration of fundamentals and of facts, that their
general type is none too prone to exercise, there will be a gain both to
them and to the standards of criticism and valuation they so largely
control. To readers of fiction it is the opening up of a fascinating
world hitherto seen only in detached glimpses. And if the average writer
of text-books or teacher of class expounding the art of writing fiction
will let go of formulas and theories handed to him by others and
consider the actual laboratory facts of what he is trying to teach, the
gain to American fiction will be tremendous.

If my summaries and discussions of the answers group by group leave much
to be desired, I plead the difficulty of exactness in dealing with
matters of infinite variations and subtle shadings, the impossibility of
covering even sketchily all the points that arise, the limitation
imposed on entirely free discussion of material furnished one through
courtesy and good will, and the fact that in any case my comments are of
extremely minor importance in comparison with the answers themselves.

The answers have in most cases been given in full. What cutting was
necessary in places has been done, I think, with as little bias as is
shown in the questions. Where specific teachers, books, authors and so
on were mentioned, there have been some omissions, nearly always of
those unfavorably mentioned. If specific instances seem ill-chosen for
either cutting or exceptions, I can plead only good intent and the best
judgment I could summon. I have been editing copy for more than twenty
years and have found few cases offering greater difficulties to
consistency and intelligent handling. The specific difficulty mentioned
is, naturally, far from being the only one.

My sincere thanks go to the authors whose kindness furnished the
material for this book. While some of them were personal friends or
acquaintances, there were others upon whom I had no shadow of claim and
who responded only through an innate spirit of helpfulness--helpfulness
not just to the asker but to the host of aspiring writers who they knew
would profit from the information experienced writers could give. My
thanks, too, for the good will of those authors who were prevented from
answering by circumstances beyond their control. I have dealt with
writers most of my life and, as in any other group of people, there are
disagreeable, trying, ridiculous and even criminal exceptions, but as a
whole I have found them very kindly, human folk. Perhaps it is because
the material of their life-work is human nature, or because their
natural bent is such as to make them choose that life-work. It would, I
think, be a vastly kinder, gentler world if all who live in it were
equally ready with the helping and friendly hand.




                             QUESTIONNAIRE

           ANSWERS TO WHICH CONSTITUTE THE BODY OF THIS BOOK


I. What is the genesis of a story with you--does it grow from an
incident, a character, a trait of character, a situation, setting, a
title, or what? That is, what do you mean by an idea for a story?

II. Do you map it out in advance, or do you start with, say, a character
or situation, and let the story tell itself as you write? Do you write
it in pieces to be joined together, or straightaway as a whole? Is the
ending clearly in mind when you begin? To what extent do you revise?

III. When you read a story to what extent does your imagination
reproduce the story-world of the author--do you actually see in your
imagination all the characters, action and setting just as if you were
looking at an actual scene? Do you actually hear all sounds described,
mentioned and inferred, just as if they were real sounds? Do you taste
the flavors in a story, so really that your mouth literally waters to a
pleasant one? How real does your imagination make the smells in a story
you read? Does your imagination reproduce the sense of touch--of rough
or smooth contact, hard or gentle impact or pressure, etc.? Does your
imagination make you feel actual physical pain corresponding, though in
a slighter degree, to pain presented in a story? Of course you get an
intelligent idea from any such mention, but in which of the above cases
does your imagination produce the same results on your senses as do the
actual stimuli themselves?

If you can really "see things with your eyes shut," what limitations?
Are the pictures you see colored or more in black and white? Are details
distinct or blurred?

If you studied geometry, did it give you more trouble than other
mathematics?

Is your response limited to the exact degree to which the author
describes and makes vivid, or will the mere concept set you to
reproducing just as vividly?

Do you have stock pictures for, say, a village church or a cowboy, or
does each case produce its individual vision?

Is there any difference in behavior of your imagination when you are
reading stories and when writing them?

Have you ever considered these matters as "tools of your trade"? If so,
to what extent and how do you use them?

IV. When you write do you center your mind on the story itself or do you
constantly have your readers in mind? In revising?

V. Have you had a class-room or correspondence course on writing
fiction? Books on it? To what extent did this help in the elementary
stages? Beyond the elementary stages?

VI. How much of your craft have you learned from reading current
authors? The classics?

VII. What is your general feeling on the value of technique?

VIII. What is most interesting and important to you in your
writing--plot, structure, style, material, setting, character, color,
etc.?

IX. What are two or three of the most valuable suggestions you could
give to a beginner? To a practised writer?

X. What is the elemental hold of fiction on the human mind?

XI. Do you prefer writing in the first person or the third? Why?

XII. Do you lose ideas because your imagination travels faster than your
means of recording? Which affords least check--pencil, typewriter or
stenographer?




                               QUESTION I

    _What is the genesis of a story with you--does it grow from an
    incident, a character, a trait of character, a situation,
    setting, a title, or what? That is, what do you mean by an idea
    for a story?_


                                ANSWERS

=Bill Adams=: Usually three words with a bit of a slideway to them,
thus, "There was once a ship"--or "The sun of morning shone upon the
water"--

I don't know how it grows, or whether it grows--it sort of occurs, as it
were.

=Samuel Hopkins Adams=: Genesis--usually from an incident, sometimes
from a single phrase which illuminates a character; never from a title.
In my entire experience I have found so-called "true stories" available
only once or twice, and then in greatly modified form. Life is dramatic,
but it isn't fictional until interpreted and arranged by the fictional
mind.

=Paul L. Anderson=: The genesis of a story with me may be any of the
things you mention, or something else, entirely different; a newspaper
item, a picture, a story some one else has told (I mean I get a
suggestion from another yarn, not that I take some one else's story and
tell it as my own). For example, the genesis of one prehistoric animal
story, was a picture in Henry Fairfield Osborn's book, _The Origin and
Evolution of Life_; of another, a group in the American Museum of
Natural History; of one story, the fact that a man will do more and
suffer more for his loved ones than for himself. The genesis of the best
story, by far, that I ever wrote, which has been consistently rejected
by magazine after magazine because it is too gruesome, was this: lying
in bed one morning, on the borderland of waking, I dreamed I heard some
one say these words: "Far above us in the darkness I heard a trap-door
shut with a clang." The memory of those words carried over into waking,
and the story grew from that. The genesis of another yarn was a trip I
once made in my flivver, which involved crossing a railroad track laid
along a side-hill. Etc., etc. "All's fish that comes to the net."

=William Ashley Anderson=: No definite principle can be laid down as to
the inspiration of a story. It may be based on an actual occurrence; a
striking tradition; a strange custom. Or an argument may suggest a point
to be proved by a story. An extraordinary character, an unusual scene,
an atmosphere even (fog, storm, scorching heat). I think one of the
basic principles is the desire to tell something unusual about things
that are commonplace, or to tell something commonplace about things that
are extraordinary.

=H. C. Bailey=: Nearly always in my mind a story begins with a character
or characters. This holds good though the main interest of the story may
be incident or the surprise of its plot. Making the story is with me the
process of providing these people with things to do and say which will
express them. I never began with a title (they are my plague), or a
setting. Once or twice with a situation. Occasionally with a sentence
which came into my mind from heaven knows where.

=Edwin Balmer=: The genesis of a story is decided, I think, by the
writer's age and experience. As a story is usually the writer's reaction
to that which at the time is of most interest to him, it used to be that
a story started with me with a situation. I started writing when I was
eighteen when I was in college, and I then caught at a situation which
established suspense. That struck me as the best start for a story.
Gradually, situation became less the whole thing and a definite increase
in concern for the characters came. I never started with a title, but
sometimes with a setting, or rather, a setting creating a
situation--such as the Alps suggesting a mountain-climbing story. Now
though I never really start with a character, the situation does not
mean much to me until it has a character in it.

=Ralph Henry Barbour=: An idea for a story is anything upon which a
story may be built, and story ideas come from as many sources as do
ideas of any other sort. The inspiration that provides the idea may be
generated by an incident, a person, a situation, a locality, even, I
think, by a condition of mind, or by two or more of these in
combination. To me a title does not very often suggest an idea for a
story; it merely suggests the idea to write a story; there's a
difference! In my case the genesis of a story is more frequently a
situation. After that a character, an incident, a locality, in the order
given.

=Frederick Orin Bartlett=: A story may grow from any of the sources you
suggest--even from that mysterious "or what?" Something serves as a
spark to fire the dry kindling of your imagination. The two essentials
are that the spark shall be hot enough and that you shall have kindling.

=Nalbro Bartley=: It, the genesis of a story, could spring from any of
the suggested things--an idea for a story to my mind suggests a theme
such as capital versus labor, love versus money, etc.

=Konrad Bercovici=: I will be hanged if I know what the genesis of a
story is. I only know I do not sleep well a few nights before I write
one. And after a headache or two a story comes. As a boy, it broke my
heart never to be able to see the actual breaking through of a plant. I
always found it broken through in the morning,--if you get what I mean.

And then pictures begin to rise before me. Pictures of things I have
seen and others that I wanted to see. And then the men and women in my
stories walk through those pictures and stay where they like and see
what they want and I stand by and watch them and agree most of the time
with each one of them and sometimes say what I would say under similar
circumstances. But, like "Mr. Saber" of _If Winter Comes_, I can see his
point of view. When the whole thing has come to an end in my mind, I sit
down and write.

=Ferdinand Berthoud=: I usually pick on an incident from some actual
happening to myself or to one of my old-time friends. Then tack on other
incidents of which I have heard. Once or twice a story has come from a
peculiar expression or the manner or speaking of some man I have known.
Or some man's way of looking at life.

=H. H. Birney, Jr.=: Ideas. Some situation or idea possessing possible
dramatic value will come to me; I will lie awake the best part of a
night or two nights thinking it over, and put it on paper the next day.
Sometimes the whole story seems to unfold itself instantaneously before
me; again I will work it out detail after detail mentally. Some ideas
for stories have come from remarks of friends, from some anecdote, or an
experience that was personal and of which the dramatic value was
unrecognized at the time.

=Farnham Bishop=: The wedding of a newly-discovered fact to something
already in mind, followed by the swift begetting, birth and growth of a
story. Example: "Carranza to Blockade Mazatlan. Mexican Navy to be sent
through Panama Canal, against Stronghold of Revolution" (newspaper
head-line, sometime in summer of 1920). That, plus British naval
officer's book (which I had recently read) containing description of the
_Scooter_ or C. M. B., developed within ten minutes into fairly complete
mental outline of _The Rest Cure_.

=Algernon Blackwood=: The genesis of a story with me is invariably--an
emotion, caused in my particular case by something in nature rather than
in human nature: a scrap of color in the sky, a flower, a sound of wind
or water; briefly, an emotion produced by beauty.

=Max Bonter=: Anything that stirs my emotions is likely to furnish the
idea for a story. It may be an incident, a character, a trait of
character, a situation, a setting, a title. It may be any one of them, a
combination of several of them, or all of them. An idea embodying all of
them, of course, would really be more than an idea; it would be
practically the story itself--either a true story in which I had
figured, or one that I had heard related--and would require at my hands
little else besides an amalgamation of the attributes specified.

Pure fiction, in my case, seems to have its inception in a contrast, or
in a sudden break of continuity--something irregular or freakish that
draws a quick focus of the mental faculties and demands of them why,
how? My mind immediately struggles to paint the significance of the
contrast, or to splice the broken threads of circumstance into a tissue
of normality. In other words, it is my mind's tendency to give balance
to unbalanced or opposing conditions or things.

For example: In a quiet little community of soft-spoken, well-civilized
males I find an old barbarian--the boss stevedore of a freight dock--who
chews, swears, drinks, and lives with a common-law wife. Their little
household is practically in a state of ostracism. My emotions are
aroused; my sympathies enlisted in an endeavor to place in a better
light this old pariah whose chief fault seems to be the carelessness
wherewith he persists in being human. I bring the opposing standards
together and after the clash the stevedore's chief detractor--a
prominent church-goer--is found to be a sly old rake; whereas the
dockman's tough hide covers a heart that had kept him true even to an
unsanctified union.

That is what I would call an "idea" for a story. Around it I would build
plot, detail, incident, characterization, etc.

=Katharine Holland Brown=: Once in a long while a story begins as a
situation: as a tangle, a conflict, to be unwound, fought out. But
almost always the story arrives as a whole--without any planning
whatever, the story is suddenly _there_, a big blurry mass of pictures
and incidents and action, that must be splattered down in black and
white as fast as you can possibly write. It goes racing by like a
runaway movie film and the best you can do is to snatch at the most
significant moments, before they escape. Therefore the idea for a story
is not an idea; it is the story itself. (With a serial, which must have
a succession of ascending climaxes, a rough outline is made and
followed, _after_ the big scenes and the principal action are jotted
down.)

=F. R. Buckley=: The genesis of a story with me is likely to be
anything. Occasionally a character; more often a title; more often
still, a good basic situation, up to and from which the story can lead;
most frequently, an ending. Story I liked best, _Archangel in Steel_,
deduced from setting and period: Florence, XVI century; connoted an age
of plotting and intrigue; since plots were villainous, hero must be
anti-plotter. History supplied the conspiracies; the story consisted of
the hero's counter-actions.

=Prosper Buranelli=: My first idea is always an incident or a situation,
sometimes several to be combined. Or a generic situation in some phase
of life--such as an opera singer's being at the mercy of the orchestra
conductor.

=Thompson Burtis=: I have had stories come to me as a result of all the
things mentioned in your question, except a title. And I'm about to try
to construct a story around a title. The most usual starting-points for
stories with me are either incidents or characters. In a large
percentage of cases I start with an incident and then work my main
character into it with regard to his particular traits.

=George M. A. Cain=: A story almost always takes its genesis with me
from a situation, sometimes suggested by an incident, character, trait,
setting, title, anything. Unless any other feature can shape itself
readily into a situation for me, there is no story. But the situation
may not mean the beginning of the story as told. I may write the whole
story to get that situation.

=Robert V. Carr=: The question involves, at least to my understanding,
chemistry, heredity, environment, psychological wounds, tricks of
memory, and a thousand and one mysteries. No doubt there will be writers
who will cleverly announce that they know exactly where they secure
their ideas, but it is beyond me. The writers of motion-picture
scenarios should be able to tell you in a few words where they get their
ideas. For my part I do not know the true genesis of any idea.

=George L. Catton=: A story with me may grow from, to begin with, the
merest trifle. Sometimes I start with a character only; other times
perhaps it is a title, or a peculiar characteristic of a character, a
situation or a setting. But the big start for me, the start I always try
to get, is a theme. It's a poor story I'll write if I can't put down the
title before I write a word. I never wrote a story yet that didn't have
a theme, and I never will. A story without a theme is a story without a
soul, and is just about as much use as a man in the same predicament. An
idea for a story with me, then, is a theme.

=Robert W. Chambers=: From an incident.

=Roy P. Churchill=: Most of my story ideas come from what I call a
"condition" for want of better expression. That is, affairs of life in a
certain setting, with certain characters, assume a "condition" which
makes for the unusual.

=Carl Clausen=: An idea for a story always means to me an incident.

=Courtney Ryley Cooper=: A story always starts with me at the finish--I
write the rest of my story to a climax. In other words, I get the big
punch of a story, and build up the rest of the structure to fit it. In a
mystery story, I always get the explanation of a thing, then fit my
incidents to this.

=Arthur Crabb=: It seems to me that a story may grow from an incident or
a character, or even a trait of character or situation, which it seems
to me are other ways of saying the first two.

=Mary Stewart Cutting=: The genesis of a story with me usually grows
from some small incident or the reverse of the incident. But in an
autobiographical story the character is the main theme.

=Elmer Davis=: The genesis of a story, with me, is a
situation--invariably the same. I see financial obligations falling due.
My salary is fixed; my credit distended to the bursting point. No way to
meet the bills but by writing fiction.... Whereupon I grab anything that
looks as if it might start a story; usually a character in a situation.

=William Harper Dean=: The genesis of a story with me sometimes is a
single word, the title, which strikes the motif of the story; sometimes
a character, sometimes a situation, or a setting. But most frequently
the beginning is the climax, from which I work backward through the
middle and to the beginning.

=Harris Dickson=: Any of these, or a combination. More usually, perhaps,
it is a story, or an incident that I hear or see. For instance, _The
Trapping of Judge Pinkham_, in _The Saturday Evening Post_, is
approximately true, and happened not long ago at the very place
described. Real incidents, however, generally begin "up in the air" and
end the same way. Better beginnings and climaxes must be worked out.

It is quite rare with me that I deliberately devise a story out of the
whole cloth.

I live in the South. It is a country that has attracted the attention of
much enthusiastic ignorance on the part of philanthropists, and many
attacks. Sometimes I do a story for the purpose of showing some
particular phase of life that is not understood at the North, and try to
make it so convincing as to silence these long-distance reformers who
haven't an idea as to how we live, and why. For this purpose I believe
temperately-stated truth, rubbed in with humor, is the most effective
vehicle.

=Captain Dingle=: In general my story comes from a vision of a character
and a situation. Sometimes only the situation. Then I make a character
to fit it--usually out of material I know.

=Louis Dodge=: With me, the genesis of a story is usually a character,
perhaps coupled with a characteristic action. I like to imagine what the
logical destiny of that character would be. And so I try to work it out.

=Phyllis Duganne=: Ideas for short stories usually come to me through
something I actually see or hear about; sometimes a person is
interesting or romantic enough so that I begin to make up things that
might happen to him--and discover I have a plot on my hands. Or
sometimes a situation is a good beginning or ending for a story, and I
try to evolve the rest. Sometimes I do and sometimes I don't--I suppose
every one has loads of fascinating situations that he can not quite whip
about into story form. Sometimes it is just a romantic spot--a house
that should have a story about it. And once in a great while I just
discover myself with a perfectly formed story on my hands, not there one
minute and utterly there the next. That's real magic--and doesn't happen
so often as I wish it did.

=J. Allan Dunn=: It varies. I am, of course, deliberately setting aside
such stories as are suggested by the needs of editors, expressed by
themselves. But I think the genesis of many stories is hard to trace.
They are evolved in the brain cortex by that comprehensive and all too
liberal phrase "subconsciousness." I mean by that process that every
writer is perforce somewhat of a dramatist, somewhat of an artist, and
that his mind, inclined and, later, trained to observe, does this
continually until an idea is born. Not necessarily, not probably is this
idea complete. Occasionally a short story that works out delightfully is
thus conceived and will project itself into the conscious mind upon the
proper stimulus--perhaps after a walk or during it, perhaps while
hearing music.

Sometimes I read a story that a man has written down as news, the
skeleton of a yarn that needs flesh about it, a heart and soul added.

Very often I endeavor to work out some particular trait or character,
with its weakness and strength. Sometimes a character I know suggests
the story. But I believe the genesis is born very much as is the theme
of a musician, the desire of an artist to portray a certain mood or key,
the inspiration of a poet.

I believe that the story-teller's profession is one of the most ancient.
I believe it may well have antedated the artist--as animated in the
cave-carver or the painter of skins. That it may have prefaced the
musician in the drum-beater or the blower of a conch. I think there was
always a tale-teller about the fires of the wildest, earliest tribes,
one who stimulated their imaginations, touched their pride, bolstered
their bravery. There are such to-day in almost every wild tribe that I
have met. And, as the modern musician, the modern artist, have evoluted
from their primitive forebears, so I think that the spark, the flicker
of story-telling, has come down in the cell together with the ear for
music, the eye for color and proportion. Add to that your technique--use
of action, color, suspense, opposing forces, laughter, tears, tragedy
and the results of experience and observation--and your story appears.

I do not mean to say we are all genuises but that the story-teller, as
the poet, is made, that the impulse is engendered with his ego.

=Walter A. Dyer=: Formerly I used to try to manufacture a plot as the
starting point for a story, but always found it very difficult, my mind
usually being ready to stop with a situation. Sometimes such a situation
would make a story, sometimes it wouldn't. I have found it comparatively
easy to get color into the settings and to do the thing up in some sort
of style, but my mind isn't inventive in the field of complete and more
or less intricate plots. Of late I have had better success in beginning
with character. And I have heard that others have reached the same
conclusion. First visualize a real person or persons, with distinctive
and out-of-the-ordinary characteristics (consistent and plausible, of
course), and get them to function like human beings. Then throw them
into the situations and settings that come easiest and see what will
happen. Sometimes a real story grows out of it, and when it does it is
likely to be a better story than one in which lay figures are fitted
into a ready-made plot. This, however, does not apply to the
requirements of all editors.

=Walter Prichard Eaton=: A story comes in a dozen different ways.
Sometimes a title waits two years or more for a plot to plot it.
Sometimes a character comes and grows. Sometimes a situation. I find I
am most successful when it is a _character_, however, which comes first,
and dictates the rest. The hardest unit is to start with a general
thesis (problem) and then get a plot and people to seem natural.

=Charles Victor Fischer=: I am writing a story that has to do with
Little Rock, Arkansas. Sitting at the eats this evening (two hours ago),
I had Little Rock buzzing round in my up-stairs. My sister spoke of an
old black mule she'd seen during the afternoon; how sorry she was for
the poor animal--skin and bone were the only things he didn't have
anything "else but." On top of that my father pipes up about a diamond
ring theft.

See the point? I'm thinking about Little Rock. (I was there about two
years ago, shortly after I came out of the Navy.) And whenever I think
of Little Rock I think of coons. The mule--the diamond ring. And all of
a sudden I had a story.

=E. O. Foster=: The genesis of a story with me generally grows from an
incident which I have observed, around which I weave a plot taking the
characters from people whom I have known.

=Arthur O. Friel=: It differs. It may be any one of these things.
Sometimes hits me suddenly, like an electric spark forming contact, and
the wheels begin to buzz. If I keep them buzzing, I have a story.

=J. U. Giesy=: Genesis with me is generally either from an incident
heard or read, or from a title which suggests a parallel or divergent
train of thought.

=George Gilbert=: All depends upon the story; some grow out of single
incidents or characters; some out of several.

=Kenneth Gilbert=: My stories seem to spring from three sources: (1) A
strange and interesting fact or incident that apparently has never been
touched upon. One story had its genesis in a piece of newspaper
miscellany, which stated that Marconi was experimenting with wireless
apparatus that would keep out eavesdroppers. That was new, so far as
fiction was concerned. Using it as the basis of a plot, I wove around it
color from my own store of wireless knowledge, decided on the title, and
proceeded to transcribe it. (2) An interesting character. One of my
animal stories illustrates this point. It was about a raccoon, which I
selected because he is a highly interesting animal; very intelligent,
and with traits that approach the human at times. Moreover, he had not
been "written out," as would seem to be the case of the dog. I had
written stories about nearly all of the menagerie except _procyon
lotors_; therefore, why not a 'coon story? The setting I supplied from
life; the incident from study and experience, and the "atmosphere"--a
vital component of an animal story--took care of itself. (3) A title. A
snappy title always suggests a story, and while I have utilized this
method several times, I prefer a plot germ in other form.

=Holworthy Hall=: To date I have written perhaps two hundred short
stories. The basic ideas arrived approximately as follows: From titles,
not over ten--notably _The Six Best Cellars_, _Henry of Navarre, Ohio_,
_You Get What You Want_, etc. From a situation, at least one hundred and
fifty. From characters or traits of character, the balance. Incidentally
I have never yet written a story in which the basic idea was not
fundamentally serious and a part of my personal philosophy; nor would I
have any interest in writing a story in which the basic idea did not
seem to see or partake of a certain universality of thought or conduct.

=R. M. Hallet=: As to (I) I think the characters and the action
reciprocally contribute to the growth of the story. Hardly anything but
action will really illustrate character, it seems to me. The further you
develop the characters, the better glimpses you get of the plot; and if
you have an idea for a plot, that will usually thicken character for
you. As to which comes first, it's probably the old problem of the hen
and the egg. Either might, logically.

=William H. Hamby=: There is no rule with me. Sometimes I start a story
with a character, and, all things considered, that makes the best story.
Sometimes the plot comes first; again a situation or an incident will
start the mind to weaving a story. The series of stories, _The
Adventures of a Misfit_, which one of my friends assures me were the
worst stories I ever wrote, was suggested merely by a name. _Red Foam_,
which other of my friends claim is the best story I have written so far,
was written from a motif--I had a strong feeling that I wanted to
visualize that frothy shallowness of judgment which is so easily mislead
by a little palaver.

=Joseph Mills Hanson=: The genesis with me is usually an incident,
situation or setting. I always have in mind a lot of provocative events
in the history of the Northwest or elsewhere, and hang my stories on to
them. I try to make my characters appropriate to the time, the place,
the atmosphere, the special problem that has to be solved.

=E. E. Harriman=: I usually think of an incident, a situation, and roll
it over like a snowball until it accumulates enough to make it a story.

=Nevil G. Henshaw=: I've no fixed rule, although, in a long piece of
work, I try to present a certain section with its corresponding
inhabitants and industries. With short stories I either work from a
single plot idea, or propound a certain phase of human character and set
out to prove it by means of the story--(as in _Madame Justice_ I
endeavored to give certain conditions under which a mother would kill
her well-beloved son).

=Joseph Hergesheimer=: It grows from the emotion caused by a place or an
individual.

=Robert Hichens=: Usually some big situation arising from the clash of
two characters.

=R. de S. Horn=: The genesis of a story with me is generally an
incident, a situation, or a character or trait of character, with the
incident predominant. I have some settings tucked away in my note-book,
but I expect they will be used only when I've got a situation, character
or incident idea to go with them. The title is the last thing I write
usually, and it generally comes hardest. However sometimes I stumble on
it in the middle of the story. Every idea that suggests a story
possibility I immediately enter in my note-book.

=Clyde B. Hough=: My story ideas generally grow out of a phrase or a
sentence and this phrase or sentence most often takes its place in the
story, either as the core, the hinging base or the climax. This sort of
plot germ is generated in various ways. Sometimes by a scene, sometimes
by a spoken word and sometimes by a man's action.

=Emerson Hough=: Some big motive or period. Not a Peeping Tom incident.

=A. S. M. Hutchinson=: Character entirely.

=Inez Haynes Irwin=: It is very difficult for me to tell you what I mean
by the idea for a story. There is so much to say that I would like to
answer this question in a book. That idea may come from anywhere or grow
from anything. It may be as you suggest "an incident, a character, a
trait of character, a situation, a setting, a title." It may come
through a conversation, by analogy, out of the very air itself. In my
experience a single scene has suddenly amplified to a whole story, a
whole novel has suddenly diminished to a story. Parts of stories, quite
disconnected, have suddenly sprung together and made one complete story.
I have had the experience of having two or three stories develop in
successive instants from a single germ; sometimes I have waited years
before writing because I could not decide which one of them was the
best. Mere ideas that I have carried in my mind for years have suddenly
developed into stories. Mere phrases and titles have spawned stories.
Interiors, empty houses, geographical situations have exploded stories.
Stories, full grown, have sprung without any warning into my
consciousness; and apparently with no spiritual or psychological _raison
d'etre_. I have even had stories, all complete, hurtle out at me from
life itself. Reading the stories of other authors sometimes brings
stories into my mind; their first paragraphs are occasionally
exceedingly stimulating. Certain ideas have always been highly
stimulating to me--uninhabited islands, ghosts, fourth dimension,
murder, they have engendered numberless stories. In brief stories come
in every way and through every medium. Everything on earth, under the
earth and above the earth is fish to the creative artist's net.

I would like to illustrate every one of the above statements but it
would make the answer to your first question interminable.

=Will Irwin=: The genesis of a story is with me usually a situation. To
give an example from a piece of fiction which I have recently finished,
a friend with much experience of the underworld mentioned in
conversation a case where a convict just released struck his girl who
was waiting for him at the door of the prison. Speculation on what
circumstances might lead to such an act gave me my story. Sometimes,
however, the story grows from contemplation of an interesting character
and speculation as to what he would do if placed in unusual or dramatic
circumstances.

=Charles Tenney Jackson=: The genesis of a story with me is more likely
to spring from a single incident, a situation--perhaps even a
phrase--one might say, a mental gleam that seems unique--and then
appears to gather to itself the characters which lead on to a plot that
slowly evolves. But always the urge of it is the first suggestion.

=Frederick J. Jackson=: With me stories grow from incidents, characters,
situations, settings _and_ titles.

Give me a good title: I don't ask more. For example, six years ago, in
New York, one popped into my mind from a clear sky. Down she went in my
note-book. Last spring I felt the urge to work. Not an idea in the
world. Out came the old note-book. I thought about it for a day, then
batted out the story that the title suggested. The title and nothing
more to start things moving.

For one story--the skipper who could always cross Humboldt Bar when
other master mariners were helplessly bar-bound.

Give me a good parody or take-off on a well-known phrase or quotation
and I seem to ask nothing more.

The first story of one series evolved from the character I conceived.
The genesis of one story was a vivid picture that occurred to me of an
outlaw coming over a hill to the cemetery outside a western town and
finding four fresh graves. Three of them were occupied, the fourth
empty, significantly so, since the other three were filled by the
outlaw's pals on their last raid. A pleasing picture, and I made it more
so by placing three sticks of wood at the heads of the filled graves,
pieces split from a wooden box. The sticks were upright in the fresh
earth. The top of each stick had a slit in it, and into each slit was
placed an epitaph. The three epitaphs were the knaves of hearts,
diamonds and clubs. In town the outlaw learns that the sheriff is
carrying the knave of spades and an earnest intention to place it at the
head of the fourth grave. This much just came to me. The rest of the
story is a matter of mechanics.

Setting? The origin of the idea for one tale was a matter of setting,
the kelp-beds along the coast south of Cape Mendocino. Small
vessels--fishing-boats--sometimes put into the kelp for shelter from
high seas and gales. The heavy kelp has much the effect of oil on
breaking seas. With this in mind, the story was a matter of mechanics. A
steamer leaving Eureka for San Francisco, a run of twenty hours, and
then disappearing for eleven days, given up for lost. She had lost her
propeller, her deckload, her boats and all loose deck-gear. All this
came ashore _north_ of Cape Mendocino--sure sign she had gone down, with
a southwest gale raging. But her skipper had managed to get her into the
kelp--he knew the kelp--and there piled all his cargo forward until the
propeller shaft was above water. He shipped a new propeller right there
in the open sea. The vessel lay against a background of cliff, the
country back of it is deserted, isolated; steamers passing there were at
least fifteen miles out to sea to get around Blunt's Reef; there was no
wireless aboard. Therefore she remained undiscovered, given up for lost,
until one morning, battered, smashed, burning her lumber cargo for fuel,
she limped into San Francisco Bay.

Fine! An editor wanted a series about the character--the nervy,
never-at-a-loss young skipper. The skipper was pure accident. I had
given no thought at all to characterization. The story, the situations,
his grasping a slim chance for life when his older officers could see no
chance at all, were what I thought made the story. But upon close
analysis it was he who made the story.

In the story I had unconsciously used the same combination of characters
as in another series--the young sea captain, the ship owner and his
daughter.

More stories wanted. Not an idea in the world. But a lot of promised
money will make ideas come. I squared off at the Underwood and started
in with the ship owner.

Conjured up a pleasing picture of him seated in his private office with
wrath oozing from every one of his pores. What will make a ship owner
mad? Loss of money was the answer. How could he lose money? By one of
his steamers being bar-bound. So the largest steamer of the fleet is
bar-bound in Gray's Harbor--has been for three weeks. Empty, she went
over the bar all right. With a couple of million feet of lumber aboard
she couldn't get out. "Martin" to the rescue. He gets her over the
bar--all this is deliberately manufactured with not a single idea one
paragraph ahead of my fingers on the keys. Then, with the steamer at
sea, ideas come galloping. It is very seldom that I start a yarn with
not even a title to work on, not an idea in the world as to what is
going to happen. But I finished up with a real story which brought a
bigger check than any I had received up to that time for any story.

The third of the series came easier. In _The Saturday Evening Post_ I
read a story by Byron Morgan called _The Elephant Parade_, a tale of
motor-trucks. Into my mind popped the idea of using caterpillar tractors
in a sea story. By this time I had "Martin" firmly in hand,
well-trained. The fourth story went over nicely. But in the fifth one I
made the mistake of bringing some war stuff in. Editor said nix. I got
disgusted with "Martin" right there and left him flat.

Now in your question you have omitted the word "theme," which might be
included. For instance one was the growth of something that can not be
called a definite idea. It was hazy, vague, when I started it. All I had
in mind was the traits of blondes (feminine) as I have known them,
especially movie blondes. My working title on the story was _The
Cussedness of Blondes_. I changed that to _Press Agents' Paradise_, and
wound up with _A Million Dollars' Worth_. The working title changed as I
got into the thing and began to see sunshine ahead. The only thing I had
in mind with which to end the story was a beautiful double-cross on the
part of the blonde girl. I ended it that way. I had many a laugh at the
situations I had conjured up and slapped into the story. Laughing at my
own stuff. Read it and weep.

=Mary Johnston=: Sometimes one, sometimes another. But usually a
character or a situation, or an idea that seems to have ethical or
evolutionary value. To see the idea for a story means to see the story.

=John Joseph=: The genesis of a story? The _idea_ for a "red-blooded"
story comes from my own experience. That is, things I have actually
seen. Such stories are, as a matter of fact, fictionized facts. Some
stories are based on a peculiarity of human nature. That is, they arise
from a study of human nature.

=Lloyd Kohler=: Of course, the idea for a story may spring from almost
anything. With me, however, the idea for the story usually springs from
an incident in actual life. Quite often, too, the story grows from a
very brief newspaper article. Incidents from my own life and the sharp
brief stories of the daily press have furnished all the ideas for my
stuff.

=Harold Lamb=: The genesis of a story is most often some happening that
comes into the fancy, followed by the impulse to draw character in
connection with that happening.

=Sinclair Lewis=: Varies. Usually from a character.

=Hapsburg Liebe=: My best stories grow from a character; then a
situation to fit in with the character. I have had most of my failures,
I think, from inventing a situation and sticking doll-like characters in
it.

=Romaine H. Lowdermilk=: With me, the good stories originate around a
character. As the characters are supposed to seem real and be
interesting to the reader I feel that they, as the actors, are more
vital than their doings. When I have my characters in mind I choose one
upon whom to center interest and one for humor unless I can combine the
two. Around this character (or characters) I work out action that I
think true to their natures and the setting to which they are native. It
takes considerable thought to think up a series of incidents leading to
some definite end or some theme, but then that's the writer's business.
He's got it to do! Given a character you can make yourself acquainted
with, you can write a story around him, and the more commonplace the
character the more likely you are to hit on a story that reads true to
life among a majority of readers. Sometimes I write from situation,
setting or incident, but usually go back to the beginning and find the
character who, when properly used, seems to work out most of the story
himself. The title is my stumbling-block. I never find a title until
after the story is done, and then only after great effort and generally
at the suggestion of some of my family who act as "critics" on the
completed work.

=Eugene P. Lyle, Jr.=: The genesis of a story, with me, may be any bit
of mental detritus lodged in the flow of thought long enough to collect
about it enough flotsam to round into a missile to throw at an editor.
The "bit" may be any of those you have listed, but I like best an idea,
or a theme. Given an idea, I like to try to translate it into life--_i.
e._, fiction. Ideas, though, are scarce. But whatever the story germ is,
it has to bite hard, else the story is not likely to be much.

=Rose Macaulay=: I usually start from some idea I have in my head about
the world or life or people and illustrate it with the particular plot
and character that seem to suit it.

=Crittenden Marriott=: The climax; I always start with it--and write up
to it. I begin anywhere, and half the time I have to begin again and
perhaps again till I find a beginning that lets the story run smoothly.
I keep the false beginnings and work some of them into the story.

=Homer I. McEldowney=: The idea of a story with me has been of varied
origin--a name, a situation, a character, or a plot. I have only written
four yarns thus far, and I have used four different methods. Perhaps the
next will be still different. And I wonder, when the various methods
have been exhausted, if I'll be, too--at the end of my rope!

=Ray McGillivray=: Two people at cross-purposes, two or more opposed
forces, or a person and a conflicting force, usually give a yarn of mine
initial impulse--at least of consideration. I sketch a plan or synopsis,
then dictate it straight through from beginning to end. My steno hands
me a result which--because of her garbling, my smoke-clouded diction and
incomplete ideas--resembles a finished story somewhat less than a plate
of steak and Idaho baked potatoes with pan gravy resembles a fat man. I
chew away at the script, and return to the girl a mess of pages upon
which there is more pencilling than ink. Being human and slightly
myopic, she does not turn out a final draft--yet. The third typing
finishes a script, though--unless it be part of a novel, or an editor
asks rewriting done. Given the right sort of quarrel, dilemma or
unconscious conflict between interesting persons or forces, however, I
believe that setting, incidents of development, and atmosphere traipse
right into the yarn without being paged.

=Helen Topping Miller=: My stories usually begin with titles. Often I
carry a title in my mind for years before I am able to find the story to
go with it. Occasionally I begin a story with only a character, but I
must have my title before I can write. Having got my characters I devise
the "conflict" which is to develop those characters, and then build the
plot around that.

=Thomas Samson Miller=: There are stories which have their genesis in an
author's rage at an inhumanity or injustice. We writers all start out
being missionaries, I think, and only slack up when we discover that
readers delighted in the jam--the story--and missed the pill. I have to
be moved by a strong desire to expose some wrong to get across a really
strong story. But my commercial success (if I may claim success) falls
along adventure stories for young men and boys. In such stories incident
is of the first importance. The incident has to dovetail into a plot,
all the action flowing to a logical climax. The second importance is a
hero--a manufactured hero, whose best traits only are shown, for
character is complex--the admirable traits always associated with less
admirable.

=Anne Shannon Monroe=: I believe a story almost always grows with me
from a character; a certain kind of a person who always gets into
trouble--or out--because he does certain sorts of things.

=L. M. Montgomery=: The genesis of my stories is very varied. Sometimes
the character suggests the story. For instance, in my first book, _Anne
of Green Gables_, the whole story was modeled around the character of
"Anne" and arranged to suit her. Most of my books are similar in origin.
The characters seem to grow in my mind, much after the oft-quoted
"Topsy" manner, and when they are fully incubated I arrange a setting
for them, choosing incidents and surroundings which will harmonize with
and develop them.

With short stories it is different. There I generally start with an
idea--some incident which I elaborate and invent characters to suit,
thus reversing the process I employ in book-writing. A very small germ
will sometimes blossom out quite amazingly. One of my most successful
short stories owed its origin to the fact that one day I heard a lady--a
refined person usually of irreproachable language--use a point-blank
"cuss-word" in a moment of great provocation. Again, the fact that I
heard of a man forbidding his son to play the violin because he thought
it was wicked furnished the idea for the best short story I ever wrote.

=Frederick Moore=: The genesis of a story with me may be any of the
things mentioned, but generally I find it is some incident upon which a
plot may be built. And frequently the plot in its final form has no
bearing whatever on the original incident which gave birth to the plot.

=Talbot Mundy=: With me, the genesis of a story is too often the need
for money; or at any rate, the need for money generally has too much to
do with it. I disagree totally from the accepted theory that it does a
writer good to be "hard up." It is true that I wrote some of my best
stories when I was frightfully "broke"--_The Soul of a Regiment_ for
instance; but the idea of selling that story never entered into the
conception or construction of it; had nothing to do with it, in fact. It
was an idea and an incident that took hold of me and thrilled me while I
wrote it. It was based on a tale that my father told me one Sunday
morning at breakfast when I was about eight years old. He told it to me
all wrong, but contrived to put across the spirit of the thing, and it
seems that that part stuck.

Ideas, I am afraid, are no good unless pinned down in the very beginning
to a character and one main incident. I can live in a world of ideas; in
fact, I generally do, dreaming along without much reference to "hard"
facts. I see pretty clearly the necessity to make ideas concrete by
turning them into persons, things and incidents. A plot is otherwise a
mere conundrum without much interest to the reader, however appealing to
the writer it may be. Thus, an idea for a story (in my case) may be an
incident, a trait of character, a situation, setting, title or almost
anything; and the temptation, which I fall for much too often, is to go
dancing along with the idea, letting it will-o'-the-wisp me all over the
place. Whereas the true process is to pin that idea down and make it so
concrete that the reader doesn't recognize it as an idea, but does
recognize a sort of familiar friend--concrete as a sidewalk. This is a
counsel of perfection; but it's the nearest I can get, after a dozen
years of trying, to an answer to your question. Be concrete. Get away
from the abstract by making it concrete. With that proviso, anything
whatever is an idea for a story.

=Kathleen Norris=: The genesis of a story with me is usually a
situation; the feeling that such and such a relationship between persons
of such and such ideals or ideas would make for human interest. A
servant girl who holds a baby above a flood all night--a boy who hates
his father's second wife, etc., etc.

=Anne O'Hagan=: The stories that I have taken the most pleasure in
writing and that have seemed to me the most successful have grown out of
speculation upon a character in a situation. If I may use an
illustration, _Wings of Healing_, a short serial published last year in
_McCall's_, grew out of speculation upon a character, proud, resentful,
out-of-joint with the world, returned to the environment which had
embittered her, brought back face to face with all that she thought she
most hated in the world. Of course, being a professional writer I have
written many stories without any such genesis, stories based on an
incident or even a setting. But with me, this is not my serious method
of trying to write a good story.

=Grant Overton=: With me, a story may begin with a background, an
incident, a character, a situation or a title. My idea of a story is
simply something arising in the first place from any one of these
sources. I should not say that a trait of character was sufficient for
me in the beginning. My first novel arose from a particular background;
my second novel was originated by an unusual situation, which I heard
of; my third novel (in point of writing) was suggested by a place; my
fourth novel arose from a character, Walt Whitman. The only two short
stories I ever did that are of any account whatever, were both inspired
by houses with "atmosphere."

=Sir Gilbert Parker=: Character always.

=Hugh Pendexter=: Dramatic situation. A flashlight picture of a climax
with no explanation. Then technique of going back and building up to it.

=Clay Perry=: To me it has been a character, a situation, an incident, a
title, striking enough to set imagination at work.

=Michael J. Phillips=: Out of nowhere at all an idea comes into my head.
It may consist of a novel association of two apparently unrelated ideas;
it may be a picturesque phrase or it may be an out-of-the-ordinary
incident. I think to myself: "That might make a story."

Immediately the other side of me pops its head out and says: "You poor
boob, there's nothing in that at all but grief and hard work and
disappointment. There isn't a story there and if there is, you can't
write it. That isn't your style at all, so forget it."

Consciously I forget it. But the next day as I am walking to the
office--most ideas come while I am hiking,--the first half of my mind
says apologetically: "Of course we know that was a fool idea we had
yesterday and there's nothing to it and we can't do anything with it,
and we don't intend to, but--If it was any good and we expected to use
it and if we had enough talent to make a readable story out of it, here
is a little incident which would tag along with it."

Then the germ and the incident are rudely thrust back into limbo. This
sort of thing happens for about three or four days, the story taking
form until I know the story and the finish and most of the incidents
before I consciously accept it and start to polish it off in my mind.
The story is complete, or practically so, before I set it down on paper.

The only story which didn't come to me that way hit me all of a heap and
convinced both sides of my mind at once, taking the citadel by storm. It
was the real, authoritative goods, and I knew it, and glowed over it. I
have rewritten it twice, and it's still unsold. While others, which were
dragged on to my door-step by my unwilling brain working under
compulsion, but which I wrote more or less easily, with my tongue in my
cheek, have been pronounced good by hard-headed gents who pay money for
fiction.

=Walter B. Pitkin=: A story may grow from anything with me. Most
commonly, though, from a big critical situation, then from a setting
(atmosphere); less often from a character trait; and still less from a
complete character in real life.

The four best stories I have written, judging quality exclusively by the
approval of editors and readers, grew out of a combination of an _idea_
and an odd situation.

A story idea sometimes starts with a title; but I find that the title
never carries me very far, though it may start something going.

=E. S. Pladwell=: I can not answer. Sometimes it just grows out of
random thoughts. Again, it comes from stories I have heard, or personal
experiences. An idea for a story grows out of a setting, a character and
a climax. The three combined make the finished job.

=Lucia Mead Priest=: I should say that the genesis of what stories I
have written have never been twice alike.

A situation, a phase of character, a setting, some other fellow's
adventure or one of my own, have furnished the kernel around which the
matter has concreted.

Now and then it has meant immediate germination but more often the corm
has been tucked away on a mental shelf to ripen or desiccate.

I do not know whether that is the usual process of a mentality or the
working of an irregular one.

=Eugene Manlove Rhodes=: How would a given character react to a given
situation? Answer is a story. Character, situation.

=Frank C. Robertson=: The world is full of interesting situations and
unusual characters. I think I always carry around some of these
somewhere in the back of my head. Every once in a while one of the
unusual characters will accidentally get into one of these interesting
situations and the story begins to crawl. These two, character and
situation, always seem to come simultaneously and demand to be written
about.

=Ruth Sawyer=: Generally from an incident or character. Primarily it is
the human appeal which decides.

=Chester L. Saxby=: A story with me grows out of any kind of seed, but
most frequently from an incident or a situation. The character is
essentially a part of that incident. The character is the shaper of the
idea in my mind; without him and apart from him it does not exist. But
the dramatic possibility of the idea is the thing.

=Barry Scobee=: It may be any one of these, or from an idea that pops
into my mind as I read or watch a movie, but mostly the genesis starts
with a situation or a _condition_. By situation I mean, of course, the
position a character is in. By condition I mean a dramatic, novel,
puzzling or pathetic theme or phase of life, somebody or group of
somebodies. To illustrate, the remote, isolated big-ranch people of
southwest Texas. They are in a _condition_ from which rises the dramatic
or novel. After all is said, an idea for a story, with me, is a
situation--even if it be the mental situation brought about by a man's
own state of mind. It is that more than character or the other things.

=R. T. M. Scott=: To some extent the genesis of a story comes to me from
all the things which you mention. More particularly it comes to me from
a character or a title. All my "Smith" stories are from character with
the exception of the first of the series. One came from the title out of
the "nowhere." There is one source, however, which you have not
mentioned and which has had significant results for me. I refer to
dreams. If I can get to my typewriter before the atmosphere of a dream
has vanished the story is sold. A case of this kind occurred with _Such
Bluff as Dreams Are Made Of_, the first of the "Smith" series. I crawled
out of bed to my typewriter and wrote the thing straightaway without an
alteration. It sold at once and, as soon as it appeared in print,
_Cassel's Magazine_ of London wanted it and I was asked to cable my
reply. I dreamed both of the dreams described in this story. Selling
dreams is clear profit.

=Robert Simpson=: The idea for a story has, with me, no specific method
of birth. It may be derived from any of the sources you refer to, or it
may, as sometimes happens, spring out of nowhere, practically complete
from introduction to climax. Most frequently, however, and particularly
with short stories, I merely sit down and write. A sentence of some sort
finds its way on to the paper, then another and another, and ultimately
a story begins to take shape. A number of these "germ sentences" may
have to be removed from the finished product, but most of them remain.
When I have evolved a story idea by this method, I go just so far and no
farther until I have decided on a climax. If I can't create a climax
that satisfies me, I allow the idea to rest for a while, and usually,
when I am not consciously thinking about it at all, a fitting climax
comes along and the story is written. With book-length stuff, however, I
generally begin with four things--a character who sounds a decided
key-note, the setting, and, however vaguely, a conception of the
beginning and the end. Until I have these ingredients fairly well fixed
in my mind, I don't attempt to "write them into existence." Generally
speaking, the principal character is suggested to me first by name. I
can't write about anybody whose name doesn't "fit."

=Arthur D. Howden Smith=: Sometimes a situation; sometimes a character
or group of characters.

=Theodore Seixas Solomons=: "Story germ," though a trite expression,
hits it with me as to what a yarn grows from. But it may be a situation
or a very odd trait of character in what would otherwise be a not
uncommon situation. Sometimes an incident, if it seems a germinal one;
rarely or never a setting or title.

=Raymond S. Spears=: Generally speaking, I have a personal interest in
some subject or other. I begin to collect information about it, as
pearls, trapping, Mississippi River, shanty-boaters, etc. Perhaps a news
clipping starts me off, or a book, or a fiction story. After a while,
perhaps I have a hundred, a thousand clippings, books, etc. Then I go to
the scene; thus I went to Muscatine, Iowa, on a motorcycle to spend half
a day in a button factory, and a few days around that button-making
town, buttons and pearls going together! Then I went on into the Bad
Lands of western South Dakota, and spent a month on the prairies in
homestead country. Later I rolled thousands of miles in homestead
countries, to get "the big viewpoint."

Sometimes the story comes ready made in the material. Sometimes it comes
divested of environment--atmosphere--and I have to dress it up in a
desert, then a river, then a green timber environment, or facts, to find
which fits. Often a story idea appears as a character of certain
tendencies, and this character I bring up by hand, sometimes for years.

I gather my material of all kinds, and each group of material has
characters, plots, ideas, themes, etc., wandering and wallowing around
in the wilderness, and gradually a group of all sorts of things that go
to make up a story is precipitated by conditions, and if I'm in too much
of a hurry, I write too soon; the way through is invisible, and I run
into a blind caon.

=Norman Springer=: In all of these ways, incident, title, etc., but most
often (say four times out of five) I visualize a character, and the
story grows about him. (This character, by the way, is never dragged out
of real life, and I don't try to make him a type. He is--at least while
the yarn is in the making--a distinct individual, with individual
characteristics. Though I do find that, as the story progresses, he
acquires little habits of mind and manner of people I know or have
known. If I don't guard against it, the character in the last story is
likely to carry over and intrude his personality into the next story,
where he isn't wanted.)

The genesis of the story is something like this: I think of the
character. I try him in this situation and that. Perhaps he fits, and
the plot grows naturally to its completion. Perhaps he doesn't fit, or
the material is only half a story--then I shove the whole matter into
the back of my mind. Weeks or months later additional situations, or
maybe new incidents, occur to mind. Out trots the character from his
seclusion, bringing his story with him.

Stories that come _via_ the title route are nearly always of the "fate"
variety.

If the plot is imagined first, and then the characters, I find that the
latter are likely to be wooden and lifeless, and the story very hard to
write.

=Julian Street=: Sometimes a situation. Practically always, however, the
situation grows out of _character_. _Never_ a title. That's always
cheap, I think. The more I work and (I hope) ripen, the more I believe
that the basis of most good stories is character. Character makes plot.

=T. S. Stribling=: I have derived stories from incidents, characters,
tales told me by traveling companions, but my longer and more serious
stories are nearly always something rather larger than a "setting"; I
would say a social condition. I like to select a people whose form of
life has the possibility of great drama. Then I enjoy studying that
people, seeing how they live, get as nearly at their psychology as I
can--customs, habits. Then I take their country and pick out spots where
I will have a scenic background that best suits the mood of the story I
propose to write.

For example just at this moment I am interested in Venezuela. I lived
down there a year, I learned enough Spanish to talk and read
intelligibly, and I expect to read Venezuelan books, histories, etc.,
for about three years more before I do a novel I have in mind on the
country. Naturally, this sort of work must be planned for years in
advance, and usually while I am working up a big story, I can get a
bunch of smaller ones on the same theme. Otherwise I would starve
between drinks.

=Booth Tarkington=: I shall have to leave this pretty indefinite. The
answer differs with every story.

=W. C. Tuttle=: Usually the title is the last thing to be printed on my
manuscript, and I pride myself on the fact that I have only had one
title changed in seven or eight years of writing.

It may sound queer to you, but it is a fact that a certain character
bothers me until I write a story around that character. Crazy, eh? Still
it is a fact. Somehow I can see and feel that personality and a strong
urge comes to me to put him in print. The strange part of it is that I
worry about that mythical character until I put him on paper.

=Lucille Van Slyke=: Story genesis with me is usually some very
insignificant object that I see in a half-light--or blurred--or far off
when I am not thinking about writing at all.

Example: Listening to a second-rate opera company give _Lohengrin_ my
eyes note very idly that one fat chorus lady has very shabby black
street shoes. My eyes travel--her face is deadly serious. Somewhere the
back of my brain clicks off a story somebody told me about Henrietta
Crossman's early struggles--how she nursed her infant son between acts
while she played "Rosalind"--on the way out of the theater I hear a
laughing feminine voice say "Chiffon is warmer and stronger than you
think--" These things I scribbled in my plot-book when I reached home.
But it was at least two years before I wrote the story these things
suggested--_but the impetus was undoubtedly a pair of shabby shoes_--and
the story was about a fragile, gay little chorus lady, the very
antithesis of the fat lady with the shoes. (Nor were shoes ever
mentioned in that story!)

Example: I pass a brownstone house, very swanky one. On the basement
window-sill is a battered tin luncheon-tray with a soiled napkin, a
wilted salad and some scraggly bits of lamb. I am on my way for a
holiday, in an I-shall-never-write-again mood. But the little old
nervous ganglia that serve as brains begin "What a rotten lunch--must
have been for the dressmaker--and maybe the dressmaker was a dear--a
princess in disguise effect"--and I find myself humming an old hymn,
_Oh, happy day_--"Felicia Day would be a good name," saith my tune. So I
jot it down in the back of my commutation-book and forget it. It's three
years later that I _write a book around that luncheon tray_.

The funny part of all this is that I didn't know until your letter
arrived that in almost every instance of either short story, serial or
book I saw a definite object in the beginning. I tried to bunk myself
into believing that I didn't, that a person or a character did it or a
plot, but it's a thing--usually in half-light--so I see it rather
blurry. Why?

=Atreus von Schrader=: A story may grow from anything; an incident, a
character or trait, a setting, a title, a situation. It is my own
experience that more stories develop from situations than any other
course. I wonder if this would be true of a writer of character stories?
By "situation" I mean a preconceived inter-relation of the dramatis
person.

=T. Von Ziekursch=: Genesis of a story.--I have little idea where the
ideas for stories come from. They merely seem to be dreams in which the
characters become clearer and clearer until I live through the incident
with them in an existence that is very real. I always have regrets when
a story is finished; then the characters seem to fade out like old
friends, gradually becoming hazier until they are lost. In my animal
stories I believe incidents that I have seen and animals that I have
studied form the stem about which I build the branchings. Perhaps the
same thing occurs with the human characters.

=Henry Kitchell Webster=: My theory of the genesis of a story is a
dynamic one. The motive power behind any story is furnished by the
setting up in some life, or group of lives, of a condition of strain or
disequilibrium, and the story itself is the sequence of events by which
equilibrium is sought to be established. I never started a story from a
title, but I fancy I have started at least once from each of the other
items of your list.

=G. A. Wells=: Story ideas occur to me in flashes. As a rule it is no
more than an idea, very brief and not, in most cases, sharply drawn.
Most ideas come to me while reading the work of others, whether of
fiction or fact, and it may be peculiar that the idea as it occurs is
never similar to the story or article as a whole or any part of it that
I chance to be reading at the time. To name a case in point, I
distinctly remember that the idea for one story came to me while reading
the third book of Dryden's translation of Virgil's _neid_. The idea hit
me so hard that I dropped everything else and began the story at once. I
don't attempt to explain it. I have never deliberately set about to
invent a story idea. That is beyond my mental capacity. Ideas occur to
me unwilled or not at all. But, given the idea, I will with confidence
contract to work it out in any manner suggested.

=William Wells=: Anything gives me the idea for a story; my head is full
of them all the time.

=Ben Ames Williams=: It is quite impossible to answer generally any such
question as this. Some of my stories grow out of incidents observed or
imagined; some are transcribed almost literally from experiences related
to me; some grow up around a character, or an apt title, or a trait of
character; some are built up as a play is built up, to put forward a
definite dramatic situation; some put in the form of fiction a
philosophic or religious idea which has appealed to me; some are merely
whimsical studies in contrast. The only general statement I can make is
that George Polti's book on dramatic situations has been of great help
to me, not so much in suggesting stories as in assisting me to see more
clearly what effect I want to produce.

=Honore Willsie=: I always start with some bit of human philosophy that
I want to get over.

=H. C. Witwer=: I'm afraid I must answer this one rather generally. That
is, I mean the genesis of a story with me grows from not one, but all
the elements you mention, _viz._, character, situation, setting, title.
Sometimes I hit upon a good title and write around that; sometimes I
spend days on the proper title after the yarn is finished. A chance
remark of an individual, quaint, funny, philosophic, etc., may furnish a
story and so with the other ingredients above. I would say, though, that
the majority of times the first thing I get to work on is a situation.
Next title. After that, I go to it!

=William Almon Wolff=: If I go back I can find that stories have grown
out of all the things you mention. But the actual making of the story
never begins until one or more persons are in my mind. I have to deal
with people, and the real planning and building of the story nearly
always begins with speculation as to what this person or that would do
in a certain situation. Here is a concrete example:

My friend, Robert Rudd Whiting, gave me, years ago, this, as an idea for
a story. Repairs to a post road in Connecticut made him, for several
days, take a detour; a little, lonely sort of road. And he used to pass
an old house, where two old ladies sat, looking out eagerly at all the
bustling life that had so suddenly come along their road.

Bob had tried to write the story, and failed. The idea fascinated me,
too. My notion was to try to work something out and do it with Bob--I
know, of course, that, if only he kept on, he could do the story, and do
it better than I could ever hope to do it. But the war came along, and
it took Bob. He was killed in action as truly as any man who died in
France, although the records don't show that. So I felt that I was
doubly obliged to write that story. But it eluded me until, at last, I
saw in my mind exactly the right man, troubled, oppressed, sick of heart
and mind and body, lured from the great road, with its rushing motors,
by the peace of the little road.

From that moment I was on the way to doing the story. What ailed that
man? What had gone wrong? What would he find when he came to the house
and the two old ladies? And wouldn't the little road, in the end, if he
followed it so far as it went, take him back, refreshed and
strengthened, to the road and the life he had abandoned?

=Edgar Young=: A story usually starts, in my case, with an idea--some
truth that I wish to prove, some fact that I wish to demonstrate, or
some effect I wish to show. This, to my estimation, is what a story
writer means when he speaks of "an idea" for a story.


                                SUMMARY

Answering, 113. By a rough system of tabulating, allowing two points for
a subject when it is usually or always the genesis of a story, and one
point when it is sometimes or rarely the genesis, we get the following
general view:

Character, 73; character and action, 4; character and situation, 10;
situation, 73; incident, 69; titles, 19; setting, 19; purpose, 14;
phrase, 11; "just born," 5; emotion, 4; miscellaneous, 26; varying as to
genesis, 57; don't know, 4.

The miscellaneous include such as: contrast, condition of mind, problem,
motive, period, tales, a name, a view of life, news, period.

These statistics from the data given can serve merely to give a general
survey and to indicate, at least approximately, the relative frequency
of use. That character, situation and incident should head the list was
rather to be expected, though hardly in that order. That titles should
rank next seems surprising.

The interest in these data is chiefly for the beginner. Probably the
best place to get an idea for a story is wherever you can get it and be
satisfied with it, but this data may show the beginner sources not
previously considered. Perhaps the best service to him is the
demonstration that creative minds do not all work alike and that general
rules are to be regarded with suspicion until found really applicable to
the particular case.

Aside from service, these data may be of some passing interest to
writers, critics and editors in general.




                              QUESTION II

    _Do you map it out in advance, or do you start with, say, a
    character or situation, and let the story tell itself as you
    write? Do you write it in pieces to be joined together, or
    straightaway as a whole? Is the ending clearly in mind when you
    begin? To what extent do you revise?_


                                ANSWERS

=Bill Adams=: It writes itself--nothing to do with me. I never read
stories--or very, very, very rarely. Most stories, though not quite so
poisonous as my own, are indigestible. Never have the slightest idea
what the end, and rarely what the next paragraph will be. Revise a great
deal afterward, in small ways.

=Samuel Hopkins Adams=: As a rule the story is pretty well worked out in
advance; always in the case of a novel. It does happen, however, that a
character upon which a story is built will take the bit in his or her
teeth and run away with the whole show--even to the extent of ditching
it! I have had a short story turn out disconcertingly different from my
original intention because one of the characters got out of control.
After I write passages, particularly bits of dialogue before going at
the story as a whole, I always revise and rewrite; sometimes I wholly
recast a story.

=Paul L. Anderson=: A story is mapped out in advance, often to the very
language, the actual words to be put down on paper. Revision is chiefly
a matter of improving the wording, though it sometimes takes the form of
shifting the action around; sometimes even of rebuilding the whole yarn,
from start to finish.

=William Ashley Anderson=: No, I don't deliberately map out a story;
though, generally, the theme of the story is in mind when I start, and
the chief problem is to hit on the best point of departure. The ending
is not clearly in mind when I start, though I am inclined to think that,
as a rule, this is a distinct defect, because without an ending clearly
in mind a story must start off without limits and the author can have no
measure by which to judge the value of his characters. This applies
particularly to the short story. In longer stories the characters must
develop logically; and there should be no limits whatever for a novel.

My usual method is to write a story as the ideas present themselves or
the characters move in their relation to the general theme. Then I
rewrite, pruning freely. After that I often rewrite again.

On the other hand I have written very clear, sharp stories at one
writing; and very vague stories after several rewritings.

But I firmly believe that no story is so good that it won't be improved
by a second writing; and there are innumerable evidences in literature
to sustain this.

Often a story changes while I am writing it. Starting with a vague idea,
a strong idea may suddenly obtrude itself. Many times the "kick" in a
story has come into mind when the story was already half done.

Thackeray noted the fact that when a man starts to set his ideas on
paper he is surprised at how much more he knows than he thought he knew.
This, I think, is characteristic of an experienced writer, while the
opposite holds true of a novice.

=H. C. Bailey=: I always plan the whole thing before I begin to write,
in considerable detail; every chapter of a book, every phase of a short
story and often the key phrases of dialogue and narrative are in my
private synopsis. But I hardly ever find that it all goes according to
plan. Characters won't do as they are told. They turn out to be
different from what I had imagined. Minor people become important. And
so the characters work out their plots sometimes in ways of their own. I
always work straight on from beginning to end. Once the manuscript is
finished I only revise details, but the writing itself is a process of
revision and rewriting page by page and line by line.

=Edwin Balmer=: Sometimes I map out the whole story in advance and I
usually try to, but I think the best stories are those where I have
merely started with a general idea and with a fairly definite conception
of the outcome and then have followed the "hunches" which seemed of
themselves to work through the story. I usually write straightaway as a
whole until about two-thirds through a short story, when I fully revise
at least once and then write to the end.

=Ralph Henry Barbour=: I do not "map out" a story in advance. I might
fare better if I did so. I don't know, and I probably never shall know
since it is something I am apparently incapable of doing. My start is
made with a situation or with certain characters. Sometimes with even
less. Whatever the start is, the characters at once take matters into
their own hands, and while I may sometimes use a feebly restraining rein
they generally end by taking the bits into their teeth. The end is
clearly in my mind when I begin. That is, to return to metaphor, the
goal is known to me. What isn't known is the road that is to lead to the
goal, nor what is to happen on the way. Infrequently I find that I have
arrived at a destination other than the one toward which I started. But
that occurs only infrequently for the reason that, given my characters,
I can usually tell how they are going to behave; or, rather, where,
having behaved--or misbehaved--they are going to fetch up. From this it
may be gathered that I let the story tell itself to a great extent. I do
not write a story in pieces, but take it as it comes. I revise very
little. Almost not at all. Perhaps my stuff would be better if I revised
more. But I don't like revising. Something is going to be lost when that
is begun. It is better, I think, to revise before you write.

=Frederick Orin Bartlett=: I never map out anything. For me nothing is
more dangerous. My story as a whole is clearly in mind, but the details
work themselves out as I write. That is true of my ending; I must know,
of course, in a general way where I am going or I have no story, but
that is as far as I commit myself except very rarely when the last
sentence bobs into my head all made. Even then I may not know the
preceding sentence or paragraph.

=Nalbro Bartley=: I write a story straightaway as a whole--the ending
clearly in mind when I start. I always have it mapped in advance--and
then, having started, I let the characters take the action in their own
hands while I keep the characters in mine. It is like building a house
with a plan--so many rooms, porches, etc.,--and letting the people who
are to live in it furnish it as they please and live their own life as a
family unit.

=Ferdinand Berthoud=: I map the story out wholly in my mind--practically
see it finished as an artist sees a picture--before I begin to write.
However, one or other of my characters is often likely to say some fool
thing I hadn't previously thought of and slightly to change the trend of
the yarn.

In writing I do the first two or three thousand words, then go for a
long walk next morning and think up the exact wording of the next slab
of misery. All I have to do then is practically to copy the stuff down.

Yes, I have the ending and the exact last words before I do a thing. Am
ashamed to say I revise very little. Always keep my finished typed copy
just two or three pages behind the original draft.

=H. H. Birney, Jr.=: Story is _loosely_ mapped out in advance and
written straight through--frequently at a single sitting. I do very
little revision--little compared to what I understand some authors do.
At times I will type a copy, single-space and carelessly, from my
original pen and ink draft, do some revision as I proceed, and then
prepare my final, double-spaced copy from this.

=Farnham Bishop=: Many of my stories start with things, rather than
human beings: out-of-the-way ships, guns, primitive locomotives, what
not. But as Kipling points out:

    "Things never yet created things,
    Once, on a time, there was a man."

Therefore I must create the man who creates or uses the thing. Also his
opponent or opponents, and the other people who more or less "go with
the situation." Try to humanize every one of them, even if he only walks
on to speak a line or carry a spear.

My usual written outline is a neatly typed list of all names of people,
ships and places. Make this before I begin writing the story, to avoid
being held up later. Spend a great deal of time trying to pick effective
names. Finding the right one helps me visualize the character. Pick them
out of the phone book, old histories, etc.

Almost invariably have the ending in mind before I begin. In fact, often
begin by setting aside a strong ending and then work up to it. Brodeur
and I wrote our first story about the fall of Knossos. All we did was to
fake up a plausible explanation of why the durned place fell. As for
revision, I write the whole yarn, read it, pencil it full of
corrections, and then type a fair copy with carbon, revising it again in
the process.

=Algernon Blackwood=: An emotion produces its own setting, usually
bringing with it a character who shall interpret it. The emotion
dramatizes itself. The end alone is clearly in my mind. I never begin to
write until this is so. Then I write fragments, scenes, fragments of the
psychology, fitting them in later. Occasionally, however, when the
emotion is strong, the story writes itself straightaway. Revision is
endless. Often the story, when finished, is put aside and forgotten. The
revision that comes weeks later, on reading over the tale as though it
had been written by some one else, is the most helpful of all.

=Max Bonter=: Formerly I used to sit down and begin writing at random,
letting the story tell itself as I wrote. I have at last decided that it
is a most pernicious practise. If, when I begin writing, I haven't a
fairly clear idea of what I am going to write, how can I bestow on each
phase or angle of my subject an appropriate measure of importance? How
can I obey the law of proportion?

The result of such procedure was nearly always a lopsided story. As a
theme gradually developed under my hand and neared its objective, I
discovered that the text was full of clots and excrescences that had no
part in the climax and had to be cut out. My straightaway rush therefore
availed me little, because it was succeeded by hash, slash and revision.
It was too much like stumbling into a story.

Mathematics being the foundation of everything, including chemistry,
which is Life, and correspondingly of creativeness, which is a phase of
life, should, it seems to me, enter directly into the building of a
story. It is a vast field for an untechnical brain like mine to browse
in, but I hope to get something out of it before I quit. In the meantime
I am striving to organize a simple but effective scheme of work,
somewhat as follows:

1. Be sure an idea is worth developing, from a "human interest"
standpoint.

2. Develop the climax first.

3. Start off the characters like a bunch of obstacle racers and bring
them to the climax as quickly, but as logically, as possible.

4. Write tersely at first, expanding where advisable--rather than write
voluminously and chop out.

5. Write nothing that won't put at least a grain of weight into the
final wallop.

=Katharine Holland Brown=: The story tells itself as it is being
written: or rather, it is fairly visible as a whole before I begin to
write at all. The climax and ending are usually written first. The rest
is written down in very concise fragments, just as these fragments
present themselves. The story isn't written consecutively the first
time. Only the high lights. Then, of course, it has to be rewritten,
sometimes three or four times; sometimes only once.

=F. R. Buckley=: I combine mapping ahead and letting a character move
the story. Method depends on mode of conception (see above). Roughly
speaking, the average story is planned thus--I conceive either the
beginning, the middle, or the end, to start with. If the end, then I
work backward and decide what shall be the high spot of the middle: and,
from that, backward and figure out just where and with what
attention-gripping incident I can start the story. These three high
points established, I take the main character and start him from the
beginning toward the middle. He decides very largely how he gets
there--his character does, I mean. And when he's reached the middle, I
start him off again in the general direction of the end. I always have
these three high points established before I begin. I write
straightforward; revise little, except for redundancies and literals,
except in the case of long stories and complicated shorts. Then I go
very carefully over the thing for errors of fact or probability: _e.
g._, I examine each situation to see whether it could have been resolved
in any simpler way than I have resolved it; whether I have made my
characters make a wide detour when they could, and would, have cut
across lots, as it were. Since, however, the character of the hero or
principal character dictates the minuti of action, I rarely (have never
done so yet) find a mistake of this kind. This is the great advantage of
having a strong character to dictate action, of course.

=Prosper Buranelli=: I have everything but small details in my mind when
I begin writing.

=Thompson Burtis=: My stories are all mapped out in advance--the exact
ending is in sight. Even some of the dialogue is in mind when I start. I
write straightaway as a whole. I revise very little. Most rewritten
pages are the result of my believing that the original page, after the
inked-in corrections, was too messy. Due to the completeness with which
I have blocked out the story in advance, there is no necessity for me to
do any important revision. I may occasionally overlook some important
point in the story and have to put it in, but in no case have I ever
made a radical change in a character or description after the first
draft. What you get from me is the story as I originally wrote it, with
perhaps one or two pages rewritten to make them neater.

=George M. A. Cain=: Advance mapping with me is of the vaguest
character. Everything shapes itself toward or from the situation
originally conceived. I write straightaway, but very rarely without a
clear notion of a possible ending, having found that to do otherwise is
to introduce useless or troublesome incidents and make heavy revisions
necessary. My greatest difficulty is in getting a story started to suit
me. Here is done almost all my revising, and I frequently write a dozen
beginnings before suiting myself. Once started, I write straight on,
unless I find, in the development of my hitherto vague ideas of the
plot, that I can get my results better by change. In that case, I simply
chuck out whatever I wish to replace, or insert the needed new incident.
I have rarely found that I improved a story by revising it as a whole.
Unless I am trying to please a new editor by nice copy, I usually submit
the first and only complete draught of the story, with an occasional
alteration of a word in pencil. Typing is the bane of my existence.

=Robert V. Carr=: Blind groper. Feeling my way through a strange
country.

=George L. Catton=: It all depends on the length whether I map it out
first or not. If it is one of those little fellows, the ones that I am
best at, the story is all "there" waiting to be written down,
start--finish. If it is a long one I let it write itself. That is, I get
the best start I can think of and go ahead. Then when I reach the right
starting-place I begin all over again. Occasionally, in a long story,
the ending, in a general and vague way, may be in sight, but it very
seldom ends as I planned at the start--something better turns up before
I get to the end. I write it straightaway as a whole, go back often and
make revisions, and often rewrite the whole thing after it is all
finished.

=Robert W. Chambers=: Map it out in advance. Write it straightaway as a
whole. Ending clearly in mind from the start. Revise murderously.

=Roy P. Churchill=: I have a working plan to begin with, end in view,
characters named, setting selected; then write straight along as a
whole. Often the working plan is radically changed, but never abandoned
completely. The plan is not detailed painstakingly, but left open on
purpose to change as the feel of the story develops. Revision with me is
a second writing of the story, nothing less. This is where I proportion
the coloring of the story and get the tones blended.

=Carl Clausen=: I always have the ending in mind. I write slowly, revise
very little.

=Courtney Ryley Cooper=: My story is as clear as a bell before I ever
start to write, characters outlined, action ready, ending clear and
often I write the finish of my story first. I revise very little--when I
have to revise I am worried to death about the yarn as I feel there is
something fundamentally wrong about it that I can't put my finger on. My
story is usually _written_ in my head before I ever touch a finger to
the typewriter. I often will spend six months _framing_ a story. The
actual writing of it is the smallest part of the job.

=Arthur Crabb=: I certainly do map out in advance. No hard and fast
rules can be laid down. It is undoubtedly true that every writer may do
one thing with one story and one with another. I think that most of mine
are thought out completely before I start; any changes after the first
draft are minor.

=Mary Stewart Cutting=: I do map it out in advance but not in detail. I
write it straightaway as a whole. The middle part of a story is the
least definite and has to be worked out. The ending is so clearly in
mind when I begin that I have to write the last sentence of the story. A
story, to me, is like a musical theme. It has to end on the same keynote
on which it was begun. But if my mind vividly depicts some part of the
story not in the proper sequence, I write it out in full as I see it and
interpolate it where it belongs. I revise after the first writing, I
revise before the final typewriting--mostly as regards minor sentences.
But sometimes after it has gone to typewriter my mind will see where
sentences should be inserted, usually to make the action clearer.

=Elmer Davis=: If I mapped it out in advance, I would sell more.
Starting (usually) with a character in a situation, I map out six or
eight chapters. By that time old Native Indolence is getting in its
heavy work; the ideas are coming hard, bright thoughts and lines for the
early chapters slip away while I am trying to think out and diagram the
catastrophe; so I fall to writing, always easier than thinking. Write
till I get stuck; then sit down and think some more; which of course
usually entails considerable revision of the earlier chapters. Not much
of the latter part.

=William Harper Dean=: Most frequently I have the ending in mind and
work definitely to develop plot sequence which will enable me logically
and directly to reach that end. I do not map out--such a practise would
throw too many restrictions about the sweep of my imagination; I want
full elasticity to that. Revise? Ah, there's the whole story! I revise
and rebuild, strengthening here, eliminating there. Recently I started
out with an idea for a short story and when I finished revising and
rebuilding I had written a serial which sold at once for a most
satisfactory price.

=Harris Dickson=: After I get some crude idea of a story I put down on a
big sheet everything I can think of, generally without logical
arrangement. This may be developed in a sort of scenario form. From this
No. 2 sheet I begin to write, in longhand, in shorthand or a
combination. You will note that sheets 1, 2 and 3 show progressive
stages of the same material. The value of the big sheet, to me, lies in
the fact that I can _visualize an entire_ story at one glance, without
having to search through a mass of tiny scraps. And it is so easy to
rewrite in one column while looking at the other.

When I get my material pretty well in hand it is dictated to a
dictaphone, from which the typist gives it back, with lines far apart
and a wide margin. This is then scratched up, rearranged, and
redictated.

Frequently a story pretty well tells itself, and sometimes the ending is
clearly in mind. Sometimes not. Sometimes one kind makes the better
yarn, sometimes the other. I've done a good story in three days, and
struggled for three months over a bad one.

=Captain Dingle=: The story is pictured as a whole, with one ending
clearly in view before a word is written. I do not--can not--plan a
story or map it out; it has to write itself or it fails; and sometimes
the ending I saw first has to give place to one more fitting to the
developed story. I do not revise, except to correct noted errors of
spelling and grammar (which are apt to slip anyhow, since I know damn
little about 'em). Whenever I have revised a story it has proved a
failure. The stuff, such as it is, must come spontaneously.

=Louis Dodge=: In the main I see my story to the end before I write
it--or at least I try to do this. But largely I let the development--the
secondary episodes--suggest themselves, or grow, as they will. I go
straight through with a manuscript, and then I revise and revise and
revise. I mean I write it entirely two or three or more times. This,
perhaps, shows a lack of clear-mindedness, or of definite theories; but
it is the best I can do.

=Phyllis Duganne=: I used to let stories tell themselves as I wrote
them, but I've come to the conclusion that it saves more time to sit
down with a pencil and paper and make a row of nice neat Roman numerals
and letters and letters in parentheses, and make a diagram of the plot.
That's mainly because, once I start writing, I can write on and on
without getting anywhere in my story, and wasting loads of time and good
paper. I write it as a whole with the general idea of the ending clearly
in mind; I never know precisely where or how the tale will end.
Sometimes I think I do, but the characters are likely to be ornery and
not do at all what I wanted them to do. And if I make them follow a
rigid plan, the story doesn't sound true. Revising depends. Sometimes
hardly at all; sometimes I find that I have gone off on a tangent and
have to cut out pages. Most frequently I find that I have to go through
a story, individualizing and characterizing my people more. I know what
they are like, but frequently I find on reading the story that I have
kept most of my knowledge to myself.

=J. Allan Dunn=: Here is a hard question, how does the story grow? When
it comes into your mind it has various stages of completion. Preferably
I would let my story tell itself. No matter how carefully I may have
outlined, gone over and over each next chapter, the thing amplifies when
one sits down at the typewriter. The characters change, the situations
demand things not thought of, you see a better way, the yeast ferments
and rises unevenly. Seldom is my ending clearly in mind. An editor
desiring certain breaks for serial publication will cause me to plan
more carefully. Sometimes certain parts of a story obtrude themselves
but not to such an extent with me as to make me break the straightaway
development of the tale in due order. I may reach them with delight,
look forward to them, find them in the forefront of my mind whenever I
think of the yarn outside of working hours.

And what are working hours? You carry your story as a cow packs its cud.
At least, I do. And I go over and over and over it, consciously and
subconsciously. I take my next chapter to bed with me and automatically
employ every spare minute, on the street even, to revolving the next
phase of the plot. Sometimes details will blur, but the main plot
extends itself far ahead. I like to try to plan a story with a purpose,
but I decidedly prefer to try so to create my characters that they are
alive and have certain wills of their own. As a rule I revise
once--direct on the typed copy. And most of the errors are in typing. If
I polish too much I am apt to overdo it, I find.

=Walter A. Dyer=: Partly answered above. I find it necessary to have
some fairly clear conception of the destination of my story movement, or
I find I have gone off at half-cock and the result is disappointing. The
details, as a rule, come as I write. I try to have a telling ending in
mind. Then I write the thing straight through and try to brace up the
weak spots in revision. I sometimes have to change important portions of
the story to get it right, but usually it is a matter of polishing. Each
story seems to present its own particular problem as to the matter of
revision. I have no rule.

=Walter Prichard Eaton=: I always like to know, before I write, around
just where I am going and coming out. It is almost essential to me.
Otherwise I would write far too much. Often the story in detail,
sometimes in actual plot, etc., changes itself as I go along. Then I
have to stop and look ahead and see a new finish.

=E. O. Foster=: Owing to newspaper training, I mull over a story in my
mind until I have it fairly complete before I begin to write. Then I
write the story with the beginning of the plot and ending clearly in my
mind, after which by means of "inserts" and "adds" I enlarge it.

=Arthur O. Friel=: I let the story tell itself. Straightaway as a whole.
Ending not clearly in mind. Revise comparatively little. Sometimes I
rewrite a section, but usually not. My main revision is with the idea of
compression and compactness.

In writing, I don't lay out my story and get it all nicely framed up
before starting to write. I start with a general idea which comes to me
from God-knows-where, and soon I'm marching along with my characters
without any very clear idea of where we're all going to wind up. We get
into swamps and cut our way through the bush and clamber up on to a hill
and maybe find something on the other side; one thing leads to another,
and eventually we make a good finish. Then we review our course, see
where we went up a box-canyon which got us nowhere, and delete that
place from the record of our trip; that's our "revision."

This, of course, is all wrong from the view-point of folks who love to
systematize everything; but it's my way of traveling through a story,
and I get there just the same. I have tried, on a number of occasions in
the past, to make my characters and events fit a more-or-less definite
idea of mine as to what they were to do, but it didn't work; they just
took matters into their own hands and did all kinds of things I never
meant them to, and all I could do was to trail along; and, darn 'em,
they made a far better yarn of it than I'd ever have made if I'd clubbed
them into submission. So now I've learned to let them do as they will,
after I've brought them together in a certain place and started them on
their way.

=J. U. Giesy=: Taking the germ, the "seed" of mental possibilities, I,
as it were, plant it and proceed to cultivate it many times for months,
letting it grow subconsciously, save for intervals when I water it by
objective examination and conscious reviewing. In this way I "rough it
in"--gain a general outline of the plot and action from first to last,
with the ending always indicated at least. I then write it, filling in
details on the main framework as I go along.

=George Gilbert=: Never map out, unless a little on novelettes and
serials. Ending always in view. Never revise plot; sometimes revise
diction materially, always some.

=Kenneth Gilbert=: All the mapping in advance is done in my mind, and I
write the story straightaway. Of course, the tale develops and fills out
as I write. I write carefully, and I find that I have but little
revising to do; usually none at all. Newspaper training, whereby the
first draft must be the last, may account for this care in preparing the
manuscript. I always have a good general idea of the ending in my mind
before I begin, and I have never been able to understand how others can
go along without knowing what the next paragraph will be, unless they
are willing to rewrite the story several times. I have always proceeded
on the assumption that a good short story is "a dramatic tale
objectively told." How may it be "objectively told" without the object
in mind?

=Holworthy Hall=: I plan a story in advance only in so far as the
development of the main situation is concerned. The ending, however,
_must_ be clearly in mind. I usually take as much time to write the
first two paragraphs as to write all the rest of the first draft.
Ordinarily I complete a first draft in a day or two--and a revision in
_ten_ days; but the time taken in revision is generally for style, and
not for treatment. That is because, in the first draft, the sequence
must be right, or I make it right before going ahead. I ought to say
here that by a "day" I mean a working day of ten to sixteen hours.

=Richard Matthews Hallet=: I have to have a pretty definite scheme, a
sequence of events with a denouement very clearly in mind, before doing
much writing. This probably comes from being a cripple in the art. Scott
certainly didn't. He wrote _The Bride of Lammermoor_ when he was so
nearly out of his head with pain that when the proofs came in he read
them, he asserts, as if they were the work of another hand altogether.
William de Morgan, to give a late instance, said he let the story drip
off his pen-point. If I did this, it would drool, not drip.

I revise a great deal, three or four times, often, of next door to
complete rewriting. Too much probably. Take a warning from Balzac's
_Unknown Masterpiece_.

=William H. Hamby=: If the story is based on character, I let it work
itself out. If it is to be a plot story made up largely of action, I
outline it ahead.

=Joseph Mills Hanson=: I usually map a story in advance and write it
straightaway as a whole, but revise it a great deal after finishing and
on reading it over, chiefly to improve the style and polish it up. I
have the ending pretty well in mind at the start, though it often
changes considerably in detail by the time I reach it.

=E. E. Harriman=: I start my central character out and make him live the
story. Follow him all the way through and get so darned anxious about
him that I can hardly knock off work to eat. The end is oftenest clearly
defined before I begin, but at times turns out differently, as the
gaul-darned central figure takes the story out of my hands and does as
he pleases. I revise from one to four times.

=Nevil G. Henshaw=: I generally have the story pretty well in mind
before I start it, and write it straight through to the preconceived
climax. Details, of course, shift about throughout, often changing the
story materially, but usually the ending is clearly in my mind. I make
one draft in ink very slowly and carefully, correcting as I go, and then
do the final revising when typing on a visible machine. I always cut,
but seldom if ever add.

=Joseph Hergesheimer=: It is planned wholly emotionally and partly in
detail, and written straightaway. I revise interminably.

=Robert Hichens=: I do not map a book out in advance, except to some
extent in my head. I have the end in my mind when I begin. This, I
consider, is essential. I write straight on from the beginning to the
end. Naturally I have to revise some passages. I usually write slowly
and carefully and try to set down my exact meaning as I write, therefore
I do not have to revise very much.

=R. de S. Horn=: I invariably map my story out in advance, although I
don't always go to the trouble of writing out the plot diagramatically.
Generally I have had the story in the back of my head for weeks or
months. It starts with the story germ, and at odd times I find myself
thinking about it unconsciously. Ideas, incidents and complications
begin to collect around it and before I know it almost I feel that I
have got a complete story. Then I sit down and write it at a single
sitting if possible, without trying to exercise any great amount of word
selection or any other consideration of technique. What I'm after in
this first script is to get my story or rather expanded plot down on
paper where I can look it over. I write in longhand and don't worry
about fine considerations of sentence or paragraph structure. The ending
is always in my mind before I begin, though I frequently change it
before I am through with the final draft. But at any rate I have an
ending which at that time seems to me to be the desirable ending. I find
that in this first draft I usually write about three thousand or four
thousand words.

Then I revise--and revise--and revise. I study my characters, dialogues,
incidents, everything, with a view toward the demands of unity and
consistency and, most of all, dramatic effect. I type my second draft
because I find it necessary to be able to read exactly at the same rate
as the reader if I am going to get my reader's impressions and
reactions. I finish one revision, type it and start another one. My
story mounts up to six, seven, nine thousand words. I sail into it,
looking for non-essentials. I cut it down to five thousand or so. Then
in my final drafts I bring it to the proper length; it is always easier
to write in than to cut out. My revisions number as high as a dozen
sometimes. In fact the enthusiasm with which I started the first draft
has greatly abated before I finish and I grow very tired of the thing;
so much so that I sometimes set the thing away to cool before making my
final draft. But I believe that it is this cold critical attitude toward
the end that really does more for the story than anything else. In other
words I believe that the story-writing ability is mainly the ability to
recognize some germ as having the story possibility, then the
imagination to expand it, and lastly the will to work at it until it is
improved to the readable state. Germ recognition ten per cent.,
imagination ten per cent. and hard work eighty per cent.

=Clyde B. Hough=: I do map out my stories ahead. One of the first things
that I must have after the plot germ has reached maturity is the climax.
After that, and of second importance only, is the title. All that I need
to know then is the high lights, the points along the way on which the
story makes its various turns. Then I sit down and write the beginning,
say the first typewritten page, three or four times. Next I dictate
straightaway from the title to the climax, creating the minor situations
and the action as I go. Thus you see the ending is clearly in mind when
I begin. "To what extent do I revise?" Always twice. Mostly three times
and often four. The first revision is devoted strictly to cutting,
compressing.

=Emerson Hough=: I see it clear in advance and revise but little.

=A. S. M. Hutchinson=: I start with the character, and he or she, and
the friends they assemble, do the rest.

Straightaway from the first word to the last.

What I would call the ultimate goal is, when I start, at the end of a
long passage. It is the characters' business (they having suggested it)
somehow to get there.

My second novel I rewrote almost entirely. Normally, I revise scarcely
at all.

=Inez Haynes Irwin=: I map out a story as carefully as possible in
advance. The beginning and ending and the thread of the psychological
development are ordinarily perfectly clear when I start. It is the
middle or developing portion which is most difficult for me to write. It
is difficult because it is always vague in my mind. I work my stories
out on paper and make several versions. I write my first ten pages three
or four times and the whole story at least twice before it goes to the
stenographer.

=Will Irwin=: I can not begin writing on a story until I see its
framework pretty clearly in mind. Getting that framework ready involves
several days of beating my brains in agony. Recently I have found it
helpful to try to write out from time to time a synopsis. Especially
must I see the end--know toward what I am working. The incidents which
develop the situation, I invent as I write. Usually, I begin at the
beginning and write straight through. However, I sometimes find after a
few days that I have begun in the wrong place. That happened to my
latest story. Having finished a scene with which I intended originally
to lead off, I realized that I had begun too far along in the action.
Getting in the background of previous events made the writing awkward,
clogged the action. I went back therefore and began with a previous
event. Then I patched these two fragments together, and proceeded to the
next scene. As concerns the main structure and method of a story,
usually I revise very little. When the first draft is finished, I spend
two or three days in "tightening up" the English and enriching the
conversations and descriptions. I am impatient of rewriting--probably a
lingering trace of old newspaper habits. However, I am married to a
fiction writer, who reads my first drafts. Quoting "Merton of the
Movies," "she is more than a wife, she is a pal and, I may add, my
severest critic." Once or twice, when I have told my story awkwardly,
she has sent me back to my desk to write it all over again from another
angle of approach.

=Charles Tenney Jackson=: As for "mapping out a story in advance," that
is done as far as may be. A very good thing, indeed, but not
indispensable. Very often the ending is not in sight. And I revise but
little. I start a story with a lead pencil, write a few hundred words,
and invariably turn to the typewriter to go on with it. That first
hurried dig may be ignored entirely thereafter, but the thread of this
beginning is in my mind all through. Very often I set down the
incidents, numbering them in order as they seem to fit in, and this
stamps the scheme in mind for work, although I rarely turn to it. In
fact, the yarn goes on to succeeding impressions, keeping always the
first idea that was its genesis.

=Frederick J. Jackson=: Do I map it out in advance? Often. Just as often
I don't. If I map out a story in advance, have a regular skeleton laid
out, the story is apt to be stilted. I'd rather have just a hazy idea of
what I'm leading up to, or, better still, a definite climax, nothing
more.

When I can just ramble on and write snappy stuff that interests myself
it will be a good yarn. If it interests me, it will interest the editor.
I'm rather cold-blooded about my own stuff. I have a jaundiced eye when
I look at it. I like a story about a character like "Mr. Conway."

I never write a story in pieces to be joined together. Always
straightaway. Make one continuous first draft--slow work at times--and
then copy it over. Typing over my original draft is about the total
extent of my revision, except for a word here and there.

About the ending clearly in mind. I wrote about a dozen stories--most of
them had the same plot--the old "perfect crime" that proves decidedly
imperfect--and in every one of these I always had the ending clearly in
mind. That's all I had to work on. I'd build up a story to fit the
climax. A different method here from that which I usually employ.

=Mary Johnston=: I usually see it in advance, see the whole more or less
completely. I do not mean, of course, in full detail. Usually it is
written straight through from beginning to end. The type of ending is in
mind from the first. Not necessarily the detail. In revision I excise a
good deal.

=John Joseph=: The story begins always with a character; then a plot is
conceived to "fit" that character. After the main plot is outlined
(always mentally) situations or episodes, and dialogue to fit, are
studied out in the rough. The typewriter now comes into play and the
story is written "straightaway," with the ending always in sight. It
runs to five thousand words perhaps. Frequently I roll the paper back
and write between the lines. I pay some attention to phraseology, but am
not particular. At page ten, perhaps, an idea comes which belongs on
page five, so I turn back and jot it down between the lines with a
pencil. When the first draft is finished there are always several pages
that are a perfect mess of scribbling between the lines, so I rewrite
these pages and renumber on through to the end. I have then perhaps a
six-thousand-word story. I begin then at page one and rewrite the entire
story, paying pretty careful attention to the phrasing. This copy will
be nearly as badly scribbled and double-lined as the first, so it has
all to be written again. This time very careful attention is paid to
phrasing. Certain episodes may be rewritten many times, independently.
(A recent page was written fifteen times--and then it didn't suit me.)
With the third draft the story is complete except for a more careful
typing and an occasional minor change.

=Lloyd Kohler=: Until recently I always mapped a piece, as a carpenter
puts up a house. Then, when I was sure that I had the whole story well
in mind, the actual writing was begun. This, in my mind, is the only
reasonable way for the beginner to proceed, who has his hands full
without worrying along as to how it will all end. It should be
understood that I only plan the main trend of the story--the
situations--in advance; the smaller details, most of the conversation,
etc., must be left for the actual writing of the story. The reason for
this is easily seen: If everything, even the smaller details, were
figured out in advance the result would likely be a fearfully dull
story--Heaven knows it's hard enough to keep a breath of real life in
them, anyway.

But although I'm strong for mapping a story out in advance, I'll confess
that there are even drawbacks to this method. The writer who said that
he wrote the first word of a story and trusted to the Lord for the next
withheld, consciously or not, the real reason for his use of this
method. The reason, or at least one of the reasons, was that the fellow
who writes half or two-thirds of a story without knowing what the end
will be has at least the big advantage that he can be assured his
interest in his story is not going to flag before it is finished. And as
long as the writer's first enthusiasm in a story can be kept fresh and
vigorous, the story will not likely be dull. I want to admit, right
here, that regardless of the good points, the author who is bold enough
to follow this method is flirting with danger.

I always start at the beginning of a story and plug away until the last
word is written. May the Lord help me if I ever attempt to write a story
in pieces to be finally joined together--it's hard enough to keep
something akin to artistic proportion without doing the thing up in bits
and then splicing the pieces.

Now the ending of the story is different. Although I know, generally
speaking, how the story is going to end before it is ever begun, I
rarely know just _exactly_ what the ending is going to be until it is
reached. That sounds like a paradox, but it isn't, and I know you'll
understand what I'm getting at.

I don't do a great deal of revising--even though I am well aware that I
am far from being a master hand at fiction writing. I believe that there
is a danger of revising being carried so far as to take the life out of
a story. Personally, I'd much rather see a few grammatical mistakes than
a dreadfully dull story.

=Harold Lamb=: Usually the story is thought out fully in advance (and as
often changed from beginning to end in the telling). The telling of it
is straightaway, with an ending tucked away somewhere in the back of the
brain.

As to revision, very, very little, except of wording and often an
accident altered after story is finished.

=Sinclair Lewis=: Map it out in advance. Straightaway as a whole. I
revise enormously--five or six times with great care.

=Hapsburg Liebe=: I try to map it out in advance, but I never write it
as it has been mapped out, unless I'm working to one of those darned
mechanical things called a surprise climax--and even then I often have
to change everything but the climax. Usually I begin to write when I
have my situation. When I've finished this, the rest is apt to come
naturally. A lot of my stories have fallen flat at the end, however,
with this method. But if I mull the story over in my head too long
before I begin to write it, it _dies_. How much do I revise? In the case
of any of my best stories, I know the thing by memory when it is
finished. I revise that much--over and over and over. I've wondered if I
wasn't in too big a hurry in the first writing; it sets, perhaps, like
cement.

=Romaine H. Lowdermilk=: I map out in advance. The ending is in sight.
But...! The map constantly changes as I go along. The ending advances or
retreats or dissolves and changes completely as new angles creep in. But
I must have the map and the definite goal before I start. I can, and
sometimes do, "let the story tell itself as I write," but the result is
appalling. I must set a goal and make each paragraph and each incident
carry the action along toward that definite end. I do, sometimes, write
the last two pages, and a few pages here and there in the body, or work
out a choice incident, or one that presents the most difficulties in the
way of brief expression, before beginning. It is like collecting
material. I get it together and fit it in where it seems best suited.
Anyway, when I get the whole thing down on paper, all jumbled as it may
be, I rewrite--on the typewriter--trying to use my brain as I go along,
and then view the result. Usually I mark, cut and interline every page,
using a system of proof-reading all my own, then--rewrite. I do this
three or four times. Then comes the final draft. How careful I am to get
this exactly right! No erasures, no vague sentences, no misspelling, no
"wrong" words. Then, when it is done I read it over. Alas! There is a
mistake on every page and gross writing everywhere. I check, mark and
interline that lovely last copy until it looks like all the rest. Then I
flop the carbon copy over and make a new draft using the backs of the
second sheets for the carbon so as to preserve both versions in case an
editor suggests changes. And I usually find the first version the
better! Upon reading this final and hard-boiled edition I am no better
satisfied with it than with any of the others and could go on cutting
and revising forever, but I call it quits and lay it in the laps of the
gods of the editorial offices. Most of my stories so far have been sent
back for some change before final acceptance. I certainly do appreciate
that and I take great pleasure in the revising. For then, and then only,
do I know how the story is striking the editors and, when I know that, I
can revise like a bear-cat. At last I am on solid ground, whereas before
I have been groping on quicksand. I like to revise and when I know
exactly what an editor wants I have always been able to deliver the
goods. It is not only inspirational, but I work with a surety I do not
feel when fighting along with the preliminaries.

=Eugene P. Lyle, Jr.=: Lord, yes--I have to map it out in advance. Then
there's a rough draft. This may be pretty fully written out in parts,
and other parts be sketchy, which have to be filled out later. There may
be pieces--merely notes--which are later joined into the whole. The
ending is nearly always in my mind when I begin--at least _some_ ending,
though this may be later changed as the actual writing develops the
story. I revise and revise and revise.

=Rose Macaulay=: I map it roughly out in advance, altering as I go
along.

=Crittenden Marriot=: I revise as I write; that is, I go back from any
place and rework till I catch up again. Finally, I go over the whole
thing _once_, have it typed and go over it again.

=Homer I. McEldowney=: I map out my story before I actually begin
writing--doping out a skeleton, complete, and with the conclusion
determined. Then when I write, I write it as a whole. My revision is of
diction and mechanical make-up, not plot.

=Ray McGillivray=: With slight modifications--usually the requirements
of taste or demand of the market I wish to please--I have the struggle,
main developing incidents, plan for character portrayal, and the climax
in mind--or in a note-book--before I begin. A few times I have started
with a situation and handful of characters, giving both factors free
rein in naming their own destiny. Invariably such a story shoots off at
a tangent--and is laid to rest, after much travel, in an old steamer
trunk, my potter's field for rejects.

=Helen Topping Miller=: My stories work themselves out. Sometimes I know
what the denouement is to be, oftener it works itself out very
differently from what I had intended. I write the story as a whole, and
very seldom revise my original version very much.

=Anne Shannon Monroe=: The story is pretty well in my mind from
beginning to end before I begin to write it, but it always follows out
little by-paths in coming to its end, of which I had no knowledge: I am
as interested as any reader could be to see how it is going to work its
way through. I follow the story, try to keep up with it, but never
dictate to it, never interfere. After it's well started my hands are
off. I revise four and five times,--sometimes more: the longer I write,
the more I revise.

=L. M. Montgomery=: I map everything out in advance. When I have
developed plot, characters and incidents in my mind I write out a
"skeleton" of the story or book. In the case of a book, I divide it into
so many "sections"--usually eight or nine--representing the outstanding
periods in the story. In each section I write down what characters are
necessary, what they do, what their setting is, and quite a bit of what
they say. When the skeleton is complete I begin the actual writing, and
so thoroughly have I become saturated with the story during the making
of the skeleton that I feel as if I were merely describing and setting
down something that I have actually seen happening, and the clothing of
the dry bones with flesh goes on rapidly and easily. This does not,
however, prevent changes taking place as I write. Sometimes an incident
I had thought was going to be very minor assumes major proportions or
_vice versa_. Sometimes, too, characters grow or dwindle contrary to my
first intentions. But on the whole I follow my plan pretty closely and
the ending is very often written out quite fully in the last "section"
before a single word of the first chapter is written. I revise very
extensively and the "notes" with which my completed manuscript is
peppered are surely and swiftly bringing down my typist's gray hairs
with sorrow to the grave. But these revisions deal only with
descriptions and conversation. Characters, plot and incidents are never
changed.

=Frederick Moore=: I map it out in advance, but I rarely follow the
first planning. However, the ending is most vital--and it is only now
and then that I use the end I started with; for instance, I once plotted
a short story which I expected would not run more than three thousand
words--and wound up with a novel a year later which totaled one hundred
thousand words. I revise to the extent that I feel a story is never
done. I had eight drafts of the novel referred to above by the time I
thought it fit to submit to an editor. Six drafts on a short story gets
the job into workmanlike condition--but the editor sees only the few
pages of complete story.

=Talbot Mundy=: I hardly ever map out in advance. My right hand hardly
ever knows what the left is doing. But I'm not convinced that this is
good. Just as an artist usually maps out his canvas in advance, without
actually seeing the finished picture, so I believe that it will usually
pay the writer to fix at least certain definite landmarks for his
guidance.

Order is heaven's first law.

I write the story straightaway as a whole. The end is never in view (or
almost never) when I first begin. But I am beginning to believe that
(for me at any rate) that is an important formula--Visualize the end of
the story first. It is certainly a prime essential of drama to provide a
clear view of the main character just at the close; and I think that
principle underlies story-writing. The writer should have in mind
throughout a clear view of his main character as he will be at the
story's end. The point had not occurred to me until I commenced this
answer; but the more I study it the more strongly it convinces. That,
and _be concrete_ all through the piece.

=Kathleen Norris=: I map it out completely in advance, even to the
words, and write it almost as rapidly as I could read it. My hard work
is done while walking alone, or while playing patience, over which game
the whole story unrolls in orderly sequence, as a rule. But frequently
after beginning a story I find a better way to do it, and I have
destroyed as much as sixty thousand words and then gone back to my
solitaire and planned it afresh.

=Anne O'Hagan=: I map it out more or less before I begin to write. Not
on paper, but in my mind. That is, I have a pretty clearly defined
notion of what I believe the outcome of the experiences they will
undergo will have upon my chief characters. I never write a story in
pieces to be joined together, although once or twice, when I have laid
aside a story because it wouldn't live at all, I have found after a time
that I needed either an introductory chapter or an interjected one to
make my characters real. I do a good deal of revision, more in verbal
detail than in arrangement.

=Grant Overton=: I do not map the story out in advance. I let it tell
itself as I write it. I write it, beginning at the beginning and work it
out to the end. The end may not be at all in mind when I begin. I do all
my work, practically, on the first draft and revise only once and then
_very_ lightly. I aim to get it right the first time, even if that means
going slowly.

=Sir Gilbert Parker=: Character, then plot, then as a whole, and the end
is always in my mind from the first. Constant revision.

=Hugh Pendexter=: Often; but never follow the outlined plot, as it is
impossible for me to vision what will emanate from the result of the
first dialogue or incident. In book-lengths I have my background
thoroughly in mind, decide on the time of the story and have for
stimulus of the action something pivotal in the history of our country.
I write, say, fifty thousand words, then rewrite to eliminate and
interpolate according to the need of late developments; then finish in
one or two installments, and rewrite. The ending usually is the moment
when the accumulation of conditional causes causes the hinge to turn, in
other words, the big climax. Revise very little. The story unfolds in
clear-cut pictures that are as real to me as if I were seeing the
incidents take place. Therefore, aside from correcting mechanical
errors, it has to go as written.

=Clay Perry=: In general I make an effort to map out the story so that
it has at least one big incident, one big character, and usually begin
to write to see what will happen to them. I write it straightaway.
Sometimes the ending is clearly in mind, sometimes not; if the
characters develop strongly, often they furnish the ending, even when I
have one in mind, and often different from the one I had in mind. I
revise always, once, sometimes twice, and have revised four and five
times.

=Michael J. Phillips=: I find I have answered most of this in the above.
I can't start with a character or a situation and wander. I have to see
it through, except that perhaps in a long story the characters rather
take the bits in their teeth and give me a ride. New incidents are
interjected that way in a long story; in a short one, almost never.

I revise like this. I write the story without searching too closely for
the right word or phrase, preferring to go over it afterward and correct
and fit and cut. I read the whole thing in the rough draft, then revise
carefully. Then write for the editor, and revise that somewhat,
occasionally to the extent of rewriting a page or two. Usually,
rewriting is cold potatoes to me--that is, after the story is finished
and ready and has been turned down, and some one, an editor or other,
suggests I do something to it. I haven't any luck with rewriting. I want
to go on with something else. That is a closed incident, more or less,
like a yesterday's newspaper story. I note that a good many unsuccessful
writers carefully write one thing, and then agonize over it, polishing
and shining it and changing it and anxiously trying to reach and satisfy
all objections, possible and impossible.

Thus they waste a lot of time, use up a lot of creative faculty on a
dead horse, and get nowhere in the end. I feel that there was a good
idea in the story, but I can evolve as good a one or better to-morrow;
and if I can't, I have no place in the writing game. Ideas are the
bricks with which we build. If you have but one idea, or one idea a
year, we won't get many houses constructed.

I don't write in pieces to be joined together. I start and go right
through to the finish. I know the opening sentence, perhaps the whole
opening paragraph almost word for word, and the closing paragraph before
I touch the typewriter.

=Walter B. Pitkin=: I have to map a story well in advance--though some
of the minor details shape themselves as I sketch in the first draft. I
have never written in pieces and joined these together. And I simply can
not imagine how anybody can pick up a pen and start writing without
knowing where he is headed. (I know a few authors who do this though.)

I revise every story at least twice, clean through. And I deliberately
avoid trying to make my first draft a piece of good writing. I treat a
first draft precisely as a painter treats his canvas and his
subject-matter at the first blocking in; it is nothing but a rough
shaping-up of the major features. All the minor details are ignored for
the sake of the deeper structure.

I see the main ending pretty clearly when I start.

=E. S. Pladwell=: Always mapped out in advance. Mentally, not on paper.
Sometimes I drive for a hundred miles, thinking as the motor purrs. I
write a story on the accordeon system--write everything in sequence and
then condense. _The ending must be clearly in mind._ This is my one
rule. If I know where I am going, it makes little difference what road I
take.

=Lucia Mead Priest=: There is no hard and fast method of working for me.
I should judge by this last winter's action that my mind does a vast
amount of milling before my thoughts are concrete enough for a
writing-pad. Usually I draft, sketchily. I have a skeleton plan of what
I hope to do.

I live much in what I am trying to create. A thought--an action, a
phrase or a word will pop out at me and I write it down. But as a rule I
write the story straightaway as a whole even though I make patchwork of
it later.

=Eugene Manlove Rhodes=: Map it out in advance. Either in pieces or
straightaway. Ending clearly in mind from the start. Revise endlessly.

=Frank C. Robertson=: Having the genesis of the story as above, I
usually map out the rest of it in my mind in a general way, leading
characters, an inciting motive, a crisis and a climax. I may do this in
ten minutes or I may stew over it for that many days; then I begin to
write it out as completely as I can. I never attempt to block out a
story in outline on paper. This, I read, is all wrong; but if I make a
skeleton draft of a story, a skeleton it remains until the end. It seems
to tie me down, and the story lacks the buoyancy that comes from
spontaneous thinking as I go along, with the characters living their own
lives, so to speak. I know my characters and my setting, so I have no
fear of the story becoming inconsistent. However, the ending is usually
in my mind when I start and the characters go logically to it. When the
first draft is finished I let it cool off while I write something else,
and then I go over it again, pruning and padding as the case demands and
changing the structure when needed. The more I write the more I find
that it pays to revise, and now a story usually gets three or four
rewritings. Before I began to sell any it only got one.

=Ruth Sawyer=: My stories are pretty well mapped out before I start
writing. But there is always a time in the process of writing when the
character or plot, whichever dominates, gets a firmer control of the
story than I do; and for this reason the story is quite likely to end
differently than I originally intended.

=Chester L. Saxby=: I used to write on little definite plot and seek the
development as I went. That, I have come to find, is a poor way to get
results and usually makes for wandering and uncertainty in the writing.
One does not hold a reader's mind by maundering. The blind can't lead
the blind. One does not even tell a story that way, but rather potters.
I get the plot idea strongly in mind and lay in the detail that will
give the most vivid _feeling_ of the point that otherwise will be merely
seen, not felt at all. That's character stuff. I do not outline; I can
not hold myself down to that. Often the story takes a turn of its own,
but I believe that changed plot development is in my mind, too, or it
would not come out. I revise very little. It is hard for me to revise on
my own criticism. An editor is indispensable for that purpose. He can
actually jerk you out of a warped perspective into which you've
hypnotised yourself past comprehending.

=Barry Scobee=: Really, no. I must have the ending, the climax, the
conclusion--usually one and the same thing, with me--clearly in mind
before I start to write. Once or twice I have written the last page of
my story before any other part.

I get an idea, a situation or condition and look it over or let it
browse in my mind a month or a year, or three years, and when I wish to
use it I figure out what the logical, or illogical, ending would
naturally be, and that is my situation. I must have it before I begin to
write. I must know what my destination is before I start on the journey,
but I do not need to know what all I shall see on the trip. That
develops as I write.

Having the conclusion in mind, I write the title--and seldom change it
afterward--then begin on my story. I have written the first three or
four hundred words of stories as many as fifteen times, and usually
three or four times. By then I am launched and I go ahead rapidly--one
thousand eight hundred words in four hours or so. Sometimes I get
checked up. It is because interest is lagging, due to my getting in
stuff that doesn't properly support that conclusion I have in mind, or
something of that sort. Then I go back to the point where it seems to
have got started wrong and write, and write, perhaps, until I get on the
right track again. It may be that the mistake is because I am getting
out of character, or dwelling too long on an insignificant phase.
Anyhow, I am developing a hunch as to when the story interest is
beginning to lag.

Then when I have written through--the copy pencilled and scribbled until
I can scarcely read it myself--I clean copy. There I exercise great
care, then send it to the editors. The revising and plot arrangement and
the like are all accomplished in that first slow-going piece of work. In
clean copying I do just what is signified--clean up the manuscript.

=R. T. M. Scott=: I usually let the story tell itself. Sometimes I map
it out in advance but, if I follow the map, I have a devil of a time to
sell the story. I write the story straightaway. The quicker I write the
quicker it sells. When I begin I seldom have the slightest idea of the
ending. I have almost come to the conclusion that it is better to write
a new story than to revise--except when I receive an editorial request
for certain changes.

=Robert Simpson=: Nowadays, when I am reasonably satisfied that I have a
story to write, I try to map it out roughly before going ahead. As a
rule, however, I have more trouble with the first paragraph than any
other part of the story or book. For the greater part the story proper
writes itself, and I write straight through from beginning to end,
revising, chapter by chapter, as I go along. In some instances I have to
go back and revise bits of the earlier chapters, nearly always with a
view to boiling them down. Only the roughest conception of the ending is
in mind when I begin, but I always have an eye on the possible climax at
almost every paragraph. Revision is at once the curse and the blessing
of my writing life. I don't like it, yet I get more satisfaction out of
it than from any other angle of writing. In a recent story of mine a
certain dramatic "moment" occupied nearly three pages. When I finished
revising the "moment"--and it cost me a day and a half to do it--it
loo